CS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 1UNIT I  INTRODUCTION AND PHYSICAL LAYER Networks  Network Types  Protocol Layering  TCPIP Protocol suite  OSI Model  Physical Layer : Performance  Transmission Media  Switching  Circuit Switched Networks  Packet Switching INTRODUCTION TO NETWORKS A network is a set of devices (often referred to as nodes) connected by communication links. A node can be a computer, printer, or any other device capable of sending or receiving data generated by other nodes on the

or receiving data generated by other nodes on the network. When we communicate, we are sharing information. This sharing can be local or remote. CHARACTERISTICS OF A NETWORK The effectiveness of a network depends on three characteristics. 1. Delivery: The system must deliver data to the correct destination. 2. Accuracy: The system must deliver data accurately. 3. Timeliness: The system must deliver data in a timely manner. CRITERIA NECESSARY FOR AN EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT NETWORK A network must

AN EFFECTIVE AND EFFICIENT NETWORK A network must be able to meet a certain number of criteria. The most important of these are performance, reliability, and security. Factors that affect the Performance of a network: 1. Number of users 2. Type of transmission medium 3. Capabilities of the connected hardware Factors that affect the Reliability of a network: 1. Efficiency of software. 2. Frequency of failure 3.Recovery time of a network after a failureFactors that affect the Security of a

a failureFactors that affect the Security of a network: 1.Protecting data from unauthorized access and viruses. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 2COMPONENTS INVOLVED IN A NETWORK PROCESS The five components are: 1. Message  It is the information to be communicated. Popular forms of information include text, pictures, audio, video etc. 2. Sender  It is the device which sends the data messages. It can be a computer, workstation, telephone handset etc. 3. Receiver  It

telephone handset etc. 3. Receiver  It is the device which receives the data messages. It can be a computer, workstation, telephone handset etc. 4. Transmission Medium  It is the physical path by which a message travels from sender to receiver. Some examples include twistedpair wire, coaxial cable, radiowaves etc. 5. Protocol  It is a set of rules that governs the data communications. It represents an agreement between the communicating devices. Without a protocol, two devices may be connected

Without a protocol, two devices may be connected but not communicating. KEY ELEMENTS OF PROTOCOL Syntax: Refers to the structure or format of the data, meaning the order in which they are presented. Semantics: Refers to the meaning of each section of bits. Timing: Refers to two characteristics. (1). When data should be sent and (2). How fast they can be sent. TRANSMISSION MODES oThe way in which data is transmitted from one device to another device is known as transmission mode. oThe

another device is known as transmission mode. oThe transmission mode is also known as the communication mode. oEach communication channel has a direction associated with it, and transmission media provide the direction. Therefore, the transmission mode is also known as a directional mode. oThe transmission mode is defined in the physical layer. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 3Types of Transmission mode The Transmission mode is divided into three categories:

mode is divided into three categories: oSimplex Mode oHalfduplex Mode oFullduplex mode (Duplex Mode) SIMPLEX MODE oIn Simplex mode, the communication is unidirectional, i.e., the data flow in one direction. oA device can only send the data but cannot receive it or it can receive the data but cannot send the data. oThis transmission mode is not very popular as mainly communications require the twoway exchange of data. The simplex mode is used in the business field as in sales that do not require

the business field as in sales that do not require any corresponding reply. oThe radio station is a simplex channel as it transmits the signal to the listeners but never allows them to transmit back. oKeyboard and Monitor are the examples of the simplex mode as a keyboard can only accept the data from the user and monitor can only be used to display the data on the screen. oThe main advantage of the simplex mode is that the full capacity of the communication channel can be utilized during

the communication channel can be utilized during transmission. Advantage of Simplex mode: oIn simplex mode, the station can utilize the entire bandwidth of the communication channel, so that more data can be transmitted at a time. Disadvantage of Simplex mode: oCommunication is unidirectional, so it has no intercommunication between devices. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 4HALFDUPLEX MODE oIn a Halfduplex channel, direction can be reversed, i.e., the station can

direction can be reversed, i.e., the station can transmit and receive the data as well. oMessages flow in both the directions, but not at the same time. oThe entire bandwidth of the communication channel is utilized in one direction at a time. oIn halfduplex mode, it is possible to perform the error detection, and if any error occurs, then the receiver requests the sender to retransmit the data. oA Walkietalkie is an example of the Halfduplex mode. oIn Walkietalkie, one party speaks, and another

oIn Walkietalkie, one party speaks, and another party listens. After a pause, the other speaks and first party listens. Speaking simultaneously will create the distorted sound which cannot be understood. Advantage of Halfduplex mode: oIn halfduplex mode, both the devices can send and receive the data and also can utilize the entire bandwidth of the communication channel during the transmission of data. Disadvantage of HalfDuplex mode: oIn halfduplex mode, when one device is sending the data,

mode, when one device is sending the data, then another has to wait, this causes the delay in sending the data at the right time. FULLDUPLEX MODE oIn Full duplex mode, the communication is bidirectional, i.e., the data flow in both the directions. oBoth the stations can send and receive the message simultaneously. oFullduplex mode has two simplex channels. One channel has traffic moving in one direction, and another channel has traffic flowing in the opposite direction. oThe Fullduplex mode is

in the opposite direction. oThe Fullduplex mode is the fastest mode of communication between devices. oThe most common example of the fullduplex mode is a Telephone network. When two people are communicating with each other by a telephone line, both can talk and listen at the same time. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 5 Advantage of Fullduplex mode: oBoth the stations can send and receive the data at the same time. Disadvantage of Fullduplex mode: oIf there is no

Disadvantage of Fullduplex mode: oIf there is no dedicated path exists between the devices, then the capacity of the communication channel is divided into two parts. COMPARISON  SIMPLEX, HALFDUPLEX AND FULLDUPLEX MODE BASIS FOR COMPARISONSIMPLEX MODEHALFDUPLEX MODEFULLDUPLEX MODE Direction of communicationCommunication is unidirectional.Communication is bidirectional, but one at a time.Communication is bidirectional. SendReceive A device can only send the data but cannot receive it or it can

only send the data but cannot receive it or it can only receive the data but cannot send it.Both the devices can send and receive the data, but one at a time.Both the devices can send and receive the data simultaneously. Example Radio, Keyboard, and monitor.WalkieTalkie Telephone network. LINE CONFIGURATION  LINE CONNECTIVITY Line configuration refers to the way two or more communication devices attach to a link. A link is a communications pathway that transfers data from one device to another.

that transfers data from one device to another. There are two possible line configurations: i.Point to Point (PPP): Provides a dedicated Communication link between two devices. It is simple to establish. The most common example for PointtoPoint connection is a computer connected by telephone line. We can connect the two devices by means of a pair of wires or using a microwave or satellite link. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 6 ii.MultiPoint : It is also called

Networks Unit1 6 ii.MultiPoint : It is also called Multidrop configuration. In this connection two or more devices share a single link.There are two kinds of Multipoint Connections. Spatial Sharing: If several devices can share the link simultaneously, it is called Spatially shared line configuration Temporal (Time) Sharing: If users must take turns using the link , then its called Temporally shared or Time Shared Line Configuration. NETWORK TOPOLOGY Two or more devices connect to a link. Two or

Two or more devices connect to a link. Two or more links form a topology.Topology is defined as (1) The way in which a network is laid out physically. (2)The geometric representation of the relationship of all the links and nodes to oneanother. The various types of topologies are : Bus, Ring, Tree, Star, Mesh and Hybrid. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 7BUS TOPOLOGY Bus topology is a network type in which every computer and network device is connected to single

computer and network device is connected to single cable. The long single cable acts as a backbone to link all the devices in a network. When it has exactly two endpoints, then it is called Linear Bus topology. It transmits data only in one direction. Advantages of Bus Topology 1. It is cost effective. 2. Cable required is least compared to other network topology. 3. Used in small networks. 4. It is easy to understand. 5.Easy to expand joining two cables togetherDisadvantages of Bus Topology 1.

cables togetherDisadvantages of Bus Topology 1. Cables fails then whole network fails. 2. If network traffic is heavy or nodes are more, the performance of the network decreases. 3. Cable has a limited length. 4. It is slower than the ring topology. RING TOPOLOGY In a ring topology, each device has a dedicated pointtopoint connection with only the two devices on either side of it. A signal is passed along the ring in one direction, from device to device, until it reaches its destination. Each

to device, until it reaches its destination. Each device in the ring incorporates a repeater. When a device receives a signal intended for another device, its repeater regenerates the bits and passes them along. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 8Advantages of Ring Topology 1. Transmitting network is not affected by high traffic or by adding more nodes, as only the nodes having tokens can transmit data. 2. Cheap to install and expandDisadvantages of Ring Topology 1.

and expandDisadvantages of Ring Topology 1. Troubleshooting is difficult in ring topology. 2. Adding or deleting the computers disturbs the network activity. 3. Failure of one computer disturbs the whole network TREE TOPOLOGY It has a root node and all other nodes are connected to it forming a hierarchy. It is also called hierarchical topology. It should at least have three levels to the hierarchy. Tree topology is ideal if workstations are located in groups. They are used in Wide Area Network.

in groups. They are used in Wide Area Network. Advantages of Tree Topology 1. Extension of bus and star topologies. 2. Expansion of nodes is possible and easy. 3. Easily managed and maintained. 4. Error detection is easily done.Disadvantages of Tree Topology 1. Heavily cabled. 2. Costly. 3. If more nodes are added maintenance is difficult. 4.Central hub fails, network fails. STAR TOPOLOGY In a star topology, each device has a dedicated pointtopoint link only to a central controller, usually

link only to a central controller, usually called a hub. The devices are not directly linked to one another. The controller acts as an exchange. If one device wants to send data to another, it sends the data to the controller, which then relays the data to the other connected device. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 9 Advantages of Star Topology 1. Fast performance with few nodes and low network traffic. 2. Hub can be upgraded easily. 3. Easy to troubleshoot. 4. Easy

upgraded easily. 3. Easy to troubleshoot. 4. Easy to setup and modify. 5.Only that node is affected which has failed, rest of the nodes can work smoothlyDisadvantages of Star Topology 1. Cost of installation is high. 2. Expensive to use. 3. If the hub fails, then the whole network is stopped. 4. Performance is based on the hub that is it depends on its capacity MESH TOPOLOGY In a mesh topology, every device has a dedicated pointtopoint link to every other device. The term dedicated means that

every other device. The term dedicated means that the link carries traffic only between the two devices it connects. The number of physical links in a fully connected mesh network with n nodes is given by n (n  1)  2. Advantages of Mesh Topology 1. Each connection can carry its own data load. 2. It is robust. 3. Fault is diagnosed easily. 4.Provides security and privacy.Disadvantages of Mesh Topology 1. Installation and configuration is difficult. 2. Cabling cost is more. 3.Bulk wiring is

2. Cabling cost is more. 3.Bulk wiring is required. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 10HYBRID TOPOLOGY Hybrid Topology is a combination of one or more basic topologies. For example if one department in an office uses ring topology, the other departments uses star and bus topology, then connecting these topologies will result in Hybrid Topology. Hybrid Topology inherits the advantages and disadvantages of the topologies included. Advantages of Hybrid Topology 1.

included. Advantages of Hybrid Topology 1. Reliable as Error detecting and trouble shooting is easy. 2. Effective. 3. Scalable as size can be increased easily. 4. Flexible.Disadvantages of Hybrid Topology 1. Complex in design. 2.Costly NETWORK TYPES A computer network is a group of computers linked to each other that enables the computer to communicate with another computer and share their resources, data, and applications. A computer network can be categorized by their size. A computer network

be categorized by their size. A computer network is mainly of three types: 1.Local Area Network (LAN) 2.Wide Area Network (WAN) 3.Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) LOCAL AREA NETWORK (LAN) oLocal Area Network is a group of computers connected to each other in a small area such as building, office. oLAN is used for connecting two or more personal computers through a communication medium such as twisted pair, coaxial cable, etc. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 11 oIt is

Computer Networks Unit1 11 oIt is less costly as it is built with inexpensive hardware such as hubs, network adapters, and ethernet cables. oThe data is transferred at an extremely faster rate in Local Area Network. oLAN can be connected using a common cable or a Switch. Advantages of LAN Resource Sharing Software Applications Sharing. Easy and Cheap Communication Centralized Data. Data Security Internet SharingDisadvantages of LAN High Setup Cost Privacy Violations Data Security Threat LAN

Cost Privacy Violations Data Security Threat LAN Maintenance Job Covers Limited Area WIDE AREA NETWORK (WAN) oA Wide Area Network is a network that extends over a large geographical area such as states or countries. oA Wide Area Network is quite bigger network than the LAN. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 12oA Wide Area Network is not limited to a single location, but it spans over a large geographical area through a telephone line, fibre optic cable or satellite

a telephone line, fibre optic cable or satellite links. oThe internet is one of the biggest WAN in the world. oA Wide Area Network is widely used in the field of Business, government, and education. oWAN can be either a pointtopoint WAN or Switched WAN. Pointtopoint WAN Switched WAN Advantages of Wide Area Network: oLarge Geographical area oCentralized data oExchange messages oSharing of software and resources oHigh bandwidthDisadvantages of Wide Area Network: oSecurity issue oNeeds Firewall

Area Network: oSecurity issue oNeeds Firewall  antivirus software oHigh Setup cost oTroubleshooting problems METROPOLITAN AREA NETWORK (MAN) oA metropolitan area network is a network that covers a larger geographic area by interconnecting a different LAN to form a larger network. oIt generally covers towns and cities (50 km) oIn MAN, various LANs are connected to each other through a telephone exchange line. oCommunication medium used for MAN are optical fibers, cables etc. oIt has a higher

are optical fibers, cables etc. oIt has a higher range than Local Area Network(LAN).It is adequate for distributed computing applications. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 13INTERNETWORK oAn internetwork is defined as two or more computer network LANs or WAN. oAn Internetwork can be formed by joining two or more individual networks by means of various devices such as routers, gateways and bridges. oAn interconnection between public, private, commercial, industrial,

between public, private, commercial, industrial, or government computer networks can also be defined as internetworking. Types of Internetwork Extranet An extranet is used for information sharing. The access to the extranet is restricted to only those users who have login credentials. An extranet is the lowest level of internetworking. It can be categorized as MAN, WAN or other computer networks. An extranet cannot have a single LAN, atleast it must have one connection to the external

it must have one connection to the external network.Intranet An intranet belongs to an organization which is only accessible by the organizations employee or members. The main aim of the intranet is to share the information and resources among the organization employees. An intranet provides the facility to work in groups and for teleconferences. TRANSMISSION MEDIA oTransmission media is a communication channel that carries the information from the sender to the receiver. oData is transmitted

the sender to the receiver. oData is transmitted through the electromagnetic signals. oThe main functionality of the transmission media is to carry the information in the form of bits (Either as Electrical signals or Light pulses). oIt is a physical path between transmitter and receiver in data communication. oThe characteristics and quality of data transmission are determined by the characteristics of medium and signal. oTransmission media is of two types : Guided Media (Wired) and UnGuided

of two types : Guided Media (Wired) and UnGuided Media (wireless). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 14oIn guided (wired) media, medium characteristics are more important whereas, in unguided (wireless) media, signal characteristics are more important. oDifferent transmission media have different properties such as bandwidth, delay, cost and ease of installation and maintenance. oThe transmission media is available in the lowest layer of the OSI reference model, i.e.,

the lowest layer of the OSI reference model, i.e., Physical layer. FACTORS FOR DESIGNING THE TRANSMISSION MEDIA oBandwidth: All the factors are remaining constant, the greater the bandwidth of a medium, the higher the data transmission rate of a signal. oTransmission impairment: When the received signal is not identical to the transmitted one due to the transmission impairment. The quality of the signals will get destroyed due to transmission impairment. oInterference: An interference is defined

oInterference: An interference is defined as the process of disrupting a signal when it travels over a communication medium on the addition of some unwanted signal. CAUSES OF TRANSMISSION IMPAIRMENT oAttenuation: Attenuation means the loss of energy, i.e., the strength of the signal decreases with increasing the distance which causes the loss of energy. oDistortion: Distortion occurs when there is a change in the shape of the signal. This type of distortion is examined from different signals

of distortion is examined from different signals having different frequencies. Each frequency component has its own propagation speed, so they reach at a different time which leads to the delay distortion. oNoise: When data is travelled over a transmission medium, some unwanted signal is added to it which creates the noise. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 15TYPES  CLASSES OF TRANSMISSION MEDIA GUIDED MEDIA It is defined as the physical medium through which the

defined as the physical medium through which the signals are transmitted. It is also known as Bounded media. Types of Guided media: Twisted Pair Cable, Coaxial Cable , Fibre Optic Cable TWISTED PAIR CABLE Twisted pair is a physical media made up of a pair of cables twisted with each other. A twisted pair cable is cheap as compared to other transmission media. Installation of the twisted pair cable is easy, and it is a lightweight cable. The frequency range for twisted pair cable is from 0 to

range for twisted pair cable is from 0 to 3.5KHz. A twisted pair consists of two insulated copper wires arranged in a regular spiral pattern. Unshielded Twisted Pair An unshielded twisted pair is widely used in telecommunication. Following are the categories of the unshielded twisted pair cable: oCategory 1: Suports lowspeed data. oCategory 2: It can support upto 4Mbps. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 16oCategory 3: It can support upto 16Mbps. oCategory 4: It can

3: It can support upto 16Mbps. oCategory 4: It can support upto 20Mbps. oCategory 5: It can support upto 200Mbps. Advantages : oIt is cheap. oInstallation of the unshielded twisted pair is easy. oIt can be used for highspeed LAN. Disadvantage: oThis cable can only be used for shorter distances because of attenuation. Shielded Twisted Pair A shielded twisted pair is a cable that contains the mesh surrounding the wire that allows the higher transmission rate. Advantages : oThe cost of the shielded

rate. Advantages : oThe cost of the shielded twisted pair cable is not very high and not very low. oInstallation of STP is easy. oIt has higher capacity as compared to unshielded twisted pair cable. oIt has a higher attenuation. oIt is shielded that provides the higher data transmission rate. Disadvantages: oIt is more expensive as compared to UTP and coaxial cable. oIt has a higher attenuation rate. COAXIAL CABLE oCoaxial cable(Coax) is a very commonly used transmission media, for example, TV

commonly used transmission media, for example, TV wire is usually a coaxial cable. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 17oThe name of the cable is coaxial as it contains two conductors parallel to each other. oIt has a higher frequency as compared to Twisted pair cable. oThe inner conductor of the coaxial cable is made up of copper, and the outer conductor is made up of copper mesh. oThe middle core is made up of nonconductive cover that separates the inner conductor

cover that separates the inner conductor from the outer conductor. oThe middle core is responsible for the data transferring whereas the copper mesh prevents from the EMI(Electromagnetic interference). oCommon applications of coaxial cable are Cable TV networks and traditional Ethernet LANs. Coaxial Cable Standards Coaxial cables are categorized by their Radio Government (RG) ratings. Each RG number denotes a unique set of physical specifications, including the wire gauge of the inner conductor,

including the wire gauge of the inner conductor, the thickness and type of the inner insulator, the construction of the shield, and the size and type of the outer casing. Each cable defined by an RG rating is adapted for a specialized function. Types of Coaxial cable : 1.Baseband transmission: It is defined as the process of transmitting a single signal at high speed. 2.Broadband transmission: It is defined as the process of transmitting multiple signals simultaneously. Advantages : oThe data

signals simultaneously. Advantages : oThe data can be transmitted at high speed. oIt has better shielding as compared to twisted pair cable. oIt provides higher bandwidth. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 18Disadvantages : oIt is more expensive as compared to twisted pair cable. oIf any fault occurs in the cable causes the failure in the entire network. FIBRE OPTIC CABLE oFibre optic cable is a cable that uses electrical signals for communication. oFibre optic is a

signals for communication. oFibre optic is a cable that holds the optical fibres coated in plastic that are used to send the data by pulses of light. oThe plastic coating protects the optical fibres from heat, cold, electromagnetic interference from other types of wiring. oFibre optics provide faster data transmission than copper wires. Basic elements of Fibre optic cable: oCore: The optical fibre consists of a narrow strand of glass or plastic known as a core. A core is a light transmission

known as a core. A core is a light transmission area of the fibre. The more the area of the core, the more light will be transmitted into the fibre. oCladding: The concentric layer of glass is known as cladding. The main functionality of the cladding is to provide the lower refractive index at the core interface as to cause the reflection within the core so that the light waves are transmitted through the fibre. oJacket: The protective coating consisting of plastic is known as a jacket. The main

of plastic is known as a jacket. The main purpose of a jacket is to preserve the fibre strength, absorb shock and extra fibre protection. Advantages: oGreater Bandwidth oLess signal attenuation oImmunity to electromagnetic interference oResistance to corrosive materials oLight weight oGreater immunity to tapping annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 19Disadvantages : oRequires Expertise for Installation and maintenance oUnidirectional light propagation. oHigher Cost.

oUnidirectional light propagation. oHigher Cost. Propagation Modes of Fibre Optics Current technology supports two modes (multimode and single mode) for propagating light along optical channels, each requiring fiber with different physical characteristics. Multimode can be implemented in two forms: stepindex or gradedindex. Multimode Propagation Multimode is so named because multiple beams from a light source move through the core in different paths. How these beams move within the cable depends

How these beams move within the cable depends on the structure of the core. Multimode Stepindex fiber In multimode stepindex fiber, the density of the core remains constant from the center to the edges. A beam of light moves through this constant density in a straight line until it reaches the interface of the core and the cladding. At the interface, there is an abrupt change due to a lower density; this alters the angle of the beams motion. The term stepindex refers to the suddenness of this

term stepindex refers to the suddenness of this change, which contributes to the distortion of the signal as it passes through the fiber.Multimode Gradedindex fiber The multimode gradedindex fiber, decreases this distortion of the signal through the cable. The word index here refers to the index of refraction. The index of refraction is related to density. A graded index fiber, therefore, is one with varying densities. Density is highest at the center of the core and decreases gradually to its

center of the core and decreases gradually to its lowest at the edge. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 20SingleMode Propagation Singlemode uses stepindex fiber and a highly focused source of light that limits beams to a small range of angles, all close to the horizontal. The singlemode fiber itself is manufactured with a much smaller diameter than that of multimode fiber, and with substantially lower density (index of refraction). The decrease in density results in a

refraction). The decrease in density results in a critical angle that is close enough to 90 to make the propagation of beams almost horizontal. In this case, propagation of different beams is almost identical, and delays are negligible. All the beams arrive at the destination together and can be recombined with little distortion to the signal. UNGUIDED MEDIA oAn unguided transmission transmits the electromagnetic waves without using any physical medium. Therefore it is also known as wireless

medium. Therefore it is also known as wireless transmission. oIn unguided media, air is the media through which the electromagnetic energy can flow easily. oUnguided transmission is broadly classified into three categories : Radio Waves, Microwaves , Infrared RADIO WAVES oRadio waves are the electromagnetic waves that are transmitted in all the directions of free space. oRadio waves are omnidirectional, i.e., the signals are propagated in all the directions. oThe range in frequencies of radio

the directions. oThe range in frequencies of radio waves is from 3Khz to 1Khz. oIn the case of radio waves, the sending and receiving antenna are not aligned, i.e., the wave sent by the sending antenna can be received by any receiving antenna. oAn example of the radio wave is FM radio. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 21 Applications of Radio waves: oA Radio wave is useful for multicasting when there is one sender and many receivers. oAn FM radio, television,

and many receivers. oAn FM radio, television, cordless phones are examples of a radio wave. Advantages of Radio waves: oRadio transmission is mainly used for wide area networks and mobile cellular phones. oRadio waves cover a large area, and they can penetrate the walls. oRadio transmission provides a higher transmission rate. MICROWAVES Microwaves are of two types  Terrestrial microwave  Satellite microwave Terrestrial Microwave oTerrestrial Microwave transmission is a technology that transmits

transmission is a technology that transmits the focused beam of a radio signal from one groundbased microwave transmission antenna to another. oMicrowaves are the electromagnetic waves having the frequency in the range from 1GHz to 1000 GHz. oMicrowaves are unidirectional as the sending and receiving antenna is to be aligned, i.e., the waves sent by the sending antenna are narrowly focused. oIn this case, antennas are mounted on the towers to send a beam to another antenna which is km away. oIt

a beam to another antenna which is km away. oIt works on the line of sight transmission, i.e., the antennas mounted on the towers are at the direct sight of each other. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 22Characteristics of Terrestrial Microwave: oFrequency range: The frequency range of terrestrial microwave is from 46 GHz to 2123 GHz. oBandwidth: It supports the bandwidth from 1 to 10 Mbps. oShort distance: It is inexpensive for short distance. oLong distance: It is

for short distance. oLong distance: It is expensive as it requires a higher tower for a longer distance. oAttenuation: Attenuation means loss of signal. It is affected by environmental conditions and antenna size. Advantages of Terrestrial Microwave: oMicrowave transmission is cheaper than using cables. oIt is free from land acquisition as it does not require any land for the installation of cables. oMicrowave transmission provides an easy communication in terrains as the installation of cable

in terrains as the installation of cable in terrain is quite a difficult task. oCommunication over oceans can be achieved by using microwave transmission. Disadvantages of Terrestrial Microwave: oEavesdropping. oOut of phase signal oSusceptible to weather condition oBandwidth limited Satellite Microwave oA satellite is a physical object that revolves around the earth at a known height. oSatellite communication is more reliable nowadays as it offers more flexibility than cable and fibre optic

offers more flexibility than cable and fibre optic systems. oWe can communicate with any point on the globe by using satellite communication. oThe satellite accepts the signal that is transmitted from the earth station, and it amplifies the signal. The amplified signal is retransmitted to another earth station. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 23Advantages of Satellite Microwave: oThe coverage area of a satellite microwave is more than the terrestrial microwave. oThe

is more than the terrestrial microwave. oThe transmission cost of the satellite is independent of the distance from the centre of the coverage area. oSatellite communication is used in mobile and wireless communication applications. oIt is easy to install. oIt is used in a wide variety of applications such as weather forecasting, radioTV signal broadcasting, mobile communication, etc. Disadvantages of Satellite Microwave: oSatellite designing and development requires more time and higher cost.

development requires more time and higher cost. oThe Satellite needs to be monitored and controlled on regular periods so that it remains in orbit. oThe life of the satellite is about 1215 years. Due to this reason, another launch of the satellite has to be planned before it becomes nonfunctional. INFRARED WAVES oAn infrared transmission is a wireless technology used for communication over short ranges. oThe frequency of the infrared in the range from 300 GHz to 400 THz. oIt is used for

the range from 300 GHz to 400 THz. oIt is used for shortrange communication such as data transfer between two cell phones, TV remote operation, data transfer between a computer and cell phone and devices that resides in the same closed area. Characteristics of Infrared: oIt supports high bandwidth, and hence the data rate will be very high. oInfrared waves cannot penetrate the walls. Therefore, the infrared communication in one room cannot be interrupted by the nearby rooms. oAn infrared

be interrupted by the nearby rooms. oAn infrared communication provides better security with minimum interference. oInfrared communication is unreliable outside the building because the sun rays will interfere with the infrared waves. SWITCHING oThe technique of transferring the information from one computer network to another network is known as switching. oSwitching in a computer network is achieved by using switches. oA switch is a small hardware device which is used to join multiple

hardware device which is used to join multiple computers together with one local area network (LAN). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 24oSwitches are devices capable of creating temporary connections between two or more devices linked to the switch. oSwitches are used to forward the packets based on MAC addresses. oA Switch is used to transfer the data only to the device that has been addressed. It verifies the destination address to route the packet appropriately.

address to route the packet appropriately. oIt is operated in full duplex mode. oIt does not broadcast the message as it works with limited bandwidth. Advantages of Switching: oSwitch increases the bandwidth of the network. oIt reduces the workload on individual PCs as it sends the information to only that device which has been addressed. oIt increases the overall performance of the network by reducing the traffic on the network. oThere will be less frame collision as switch creates the

will be less frame collision as switch creates the collision domain for each connection. Disadvantages of Switching: oA Switch is more expensive than network bridges. oA Switch cannot determine the network connectivity issues easily. oProper designing and configuration of the switch are required to handle multicast packets. Types of Switching Techniques annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 25CIRCUIT SWITCHING oCircuit switching is a switching technique that establishes a

is a switching technique that establishes a dedicated path between sender and receiver. oIn the Circuit Switching Technique, once the connection is established then the dedicated path will remain to exist until the connection is terminated. oCircuit switching in a network operates in a similar way as the telephone works. oA complete endtoend path must exist before the communication takes place. oIn case of circuit switching technique, when any user wants to send the data, voice, video, a request

wants to send the data, voice, video, a request signal is sent to the receiver then the receiver sends back the acknowledgment to ensure the availability of the dedicated path. After receiving the acknowledgment, dedicated path transfers the data. oCircuit switching is used in public telephone network. It is used for voice transmission. oFixed data can be transferred at a time in circuit switching technology. Phases in Circuit Switching Communication through circuit switching has 3 phases:

through circuit switching has 3 phases: 1.Connection Setup  Establishment  In this phase, a dedicated circuit is established from the source to the destination through a number of intermediate switching centres. The sender and receiver transmits communication signals to request and acknowledge establishment of circuits. 2.Data transfer  Once the circuit has been established, data and voice are transferred from the source to the destination. The dedicated connection remains as long as the end

dedicated connection remains as long as the end parties communicate. 3.Connection teardown  Termination  When data transfer is complete, the connection is relinquished. The disconnection is initiated by any one of the user. Disconnection involves removal of all intermediate links from the sender to the receiver. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 26Advantages It is suitable for long continuous transmission, since a continuous transmission route is established, that

continuous transmission route is established, that remains throughout the conversation. The dedicated path ensures a steady data rate of communication. No intermediate delays are found once the circuit is established. So, they are suitable for real time communication of both voice and data transmission. Disadvantages Circuit switching establishes a dedicated connection between the end parties. This dedicated connection cannot be used for transmitting any other data, even if the data load is very

any other data, even if the data load is very low. Bandwidth requirement is high even in cases of low data volume. There is underutilization of system resources. Once resources are allocated to a particular connection, they cannot be used for other connections. Time required to establish connection may be high. It is more expensive than other switching techniques as a dedicated path is required for each connection. PACKET SWITCHING oThe packet switching is a switching technique in which the

switching is a switching technique in which the message is sent in one go, but it is divided into smaller pieces, and they are sent individually. oThe message splits into smaller pieces known as packets and packets are given a unique number to identify their order at the receiving end. oEvery packet contains some information in its headers such as source address, destination address and sequence number. oPackets will travel across the network, taking the shortest path as possible. oAll the

taking the shortest path as possible. oAll the packets are reassembled at the receiving end in correct order. oIf any packet is missing or corrupted, then the message will be sent to resend the message. oIf the correct order of the packets is reached, then the acknowledgment message will be sent. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 27Advantages of Packet Switching: oCosteffective: In packet switching technique, switching devices do not require massive secondary storage

devices do not require massive secondary storage to store the packets, so cost is minimized to some extent. Therefore, we can say that the packet switching technique is a cost effective technique. oReliable: If any node is busy, then the packets can be rerouted. This ensures that the Packet Switching technique provides reliable communication. oEfficient: Packet Switching is an efficient technique. It does not require any established path prior to the transmission, and many users can use the same

the transmission, and many users can use the same communication channel simultaneously, hence makes use of available bandwidth very efficiently. Disadvantages of Packet Switching: oPacket Switching technique cannot be implemented in those applications that require low delay and highquality services. oThe protocols used in a packet switching technique are very complex and requires high implementation cost. oIf the network is overloaded or corrupted, then it requires retransmission of lost

corrupted, then it requires retransmission of lost packets. It can also lead to the loss of critical information if errors are nor recovered. APPROACHES OF PACKET SWITCHING There are two approaches to Packet Switching: oDatagram Packet switching oVirtual Circuit Switching Datagram Packet switching oIt is a packet switching technology in which packet is known as a datagram, is considered as an independent entity. oEach packet contains the information about the destination and switch uses this

about the destination and switch uses this information to forward the packet to the correct destination. oThe packets are reassembled at the receiving end in correct order. oIn Datagram Packet Switching technique, the path is not fixed. oIntermediate nodes take the routing decisions to forward the packets. oDatagram Packet Switching is also known as connectionless switching. oThere are no setup or teardown phases. oEach packet is treated the same by a switch regardless of its source or

the same by a switch regardless of its source or destination. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 28 In this example, all four packets (or datagrams) belong to the same message, but may travel different paths to reach their destination. Routing Table In this type of network, each switch (or packet switch) has a routing table which is based on the destination address. The routing tables are dynamic and are updated periodically. The destination addresses and the

periodically. The destination addresses and the corresponding forwarding output ports are recorded in the tables. Delay in a datagram network The packet travels through two switches. There are three transmission times (3T),three propagation delays (slopes 3t of the lines), and two waiting times (w1  w2). We ignore the processing time in each switch. Total delay  3T  3t  w1  w2 annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 29Virtual Circuit Switching oVirtual Circuit Switching is

Circuit Switching oVirtual Circuit Switching is also known as connectionoriented switching. oIn the case of Virtual circuit switching, a virtual connection is established before the messages are sent. oCall request and call accept packets are used to establish the connection between sender and receiver. oIn this case, the path is fixed for the duration of a logical connection. Virtual Circuit Identifier (VCI) A virtual circuit identifier (VCI) that uniquely identifies the connection at this

that uniquely identifies the connection at this switch. A VCI, unlike a global address, is a small number that has only switch scope; it is used by a frame between two switches. When a frame arrives at a switch, it has a VCI; when it leaves, it has a different VCI. Virtual Circuit Table Every Virtual Circuit (VC) maintains a table called Virtual Circuit table. One entry in the VC table on a single switch contains the following : An incoming interface on which packets for this VC arrive at the

on which packets for this VC arrive at the switch An outgoing interface in which packets for this VC leave the switch A outgoing VCI that will be used for outgoing packets Example : Source A sends a frame to Source B through Switch 1, Switch 2 and Switch 3. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 30Types of Virtual Circuits There are two broad classes of Virtual Circuits. They are 1. PVC  Permanent Virtual Circuit Network Administrator will configure the state The virtual

Administrator will configure the state The virtual circuit is permanent (PVC) 2. SVC  Switched Virtual Circuit A host can send messages into the network to cause the state to be established. This is referred as signaling. A host may set up and delete such a VC dynamically without the involvement of a network administrator Delay in VirtualCircuit Networks The packet is traveling through two switches (routers). There are three transmission times (3T ), three propagation times (3t), data transfer

(3T ), three propagation times (3t), data transfer depicted by the sloping lines, a setup delay (which includes transmission and propagation in two directions), and a teardown delay (which includes transmission and propagation in one direction). Total delay  3T  3t  Setup delay  Teardown delay annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 31COMPARISON  CIRCUIT SWITCHING AND PACKET SWITCHING PACKET SWITCHING CIRCUIT SWITCHING Virtual Circuit Switching Datagram Switching Connection

Circuit Switching Datagram Switching Connection oriented Connection oriented Connection less Ensures in order delivery Ensures in order deliveryPackets may be delivered out of order No reordering is required No reordering is required Reordering is required A dedicated path exists for data transferA dedicated path exists for data transferNo dedicated path exists for data transfer All the packets take the same pathAll the packets take the same pathAll the packets may not take the same path

pathAll the packets may not take the same path Resources are allocated before data transferResources are allocated on demand using 1st packetNo resources are allocated Stream oriented Packet oriented Packet oriented Fixed bandwidth Dynamic Bandwidth Dynamic bandwidth Reliable Reliable Unreliable No overheads Less overheads Higher overheads Implemented at physical layerImplemented at data link layerImplemented at network layer Inefficient in terms of resource utilizationProvides better efficiency

of resource utilizationProvides better efficiency than circuit switched systemsProvides better efficiency than message switched systems Example Telephone systemsExamples X.25, Frame relayExample Internet annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 32MESSAGE SWITCHING oMessage Switching is a switching technique in which a message is transferred as a complete unit and routed through intermediate nodes at which it is stored and forwarded. oIn Message Switching technique, there is

oIn Message Switching technique, there is no establishment of a dedicated path between the sender and receiver. oThe destination address is appended to the message. Message Switching provides a dynamic routing as the message is routed through the intermediate nodes based on the information available in the message. oMessage switches are programmed in such a way so that they can provide the most efficient routes. oEach and every node stores the entire message and then forward it to the next node.

message and then forward it to the next node. This type of network is known as store and forward network. oMessage switching treats each message as an independent entity. PROTOCOL LAYERING In networking, a protocol defines the rules that both the sender and receiver and all intermediate devices need to follow to be able to communicate effectively. A protocol provides a communication service that the process use to exchange messages. When communication is simple, we may need only one simple

is simple, we may need only one simple protocol. When the communication is complex, we may need to divide the task between different layers, in which case we need a protocol at each layer, or protocol layering. Protocol layering is that it allows us to separate the services from the implementation. A layer needs to be able to receive a set of services from the lower layer and to give the services to the upper layer. Any modification in one layer will not affect the other layers.

in one layer will not affect the other layers. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 33 Basic Elements of Layered Architecture Service: It is a set of actions that a layer provides to the higher layer. Protocol: It defines a set of rules that a layer uses to exchange the information with peer entity. These rules mainly concern about both the contents and order of the messages used. Interface: It is a way through which the message is transferred from one layer to another

message is transferred from one layer to another layer. Features of Protocol Layering 1. It decomposes the problem of building a network into more manageable components. 2. It provides a more modular design. Principles of Protocol Layering 1.The first principle dictates that if we want bidirectional communication, we need to make each layer so that it is able to perform two opposite tasks, one in each direction. 2.The second principle that we need to follow in protocol layering is that the two

to follow in protocol layering is that the two objects under each layer at both sites should be identical. Protocol Graph The set of protocols that make up a network system is called a protocol graph. The nodes of the graph correspond to protocols, and the edges represent a dependence relation. For example, the Figure below illustrates a protocol graph consists of protocols RRP (RequestReply Protocol) and MSP (Message Stream Protocol) implement two different types of processtoprocess channels,

two different types of processtoprocess channels, and both depend on the HHP (Hostto Host Protocol) which provides a hosttohost connectivity service  annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 34OSI MODEL oOSI stands for Open System Interconnection. oIt is a reference model that describes how information from a software application in one computer moves through a physical medium to the software application in another computer. oOSI consists of seven layers, and each layer

oOSI consists of seven layers, and each layer performs a particular network function. oOSI model was developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1984, and it is now considered as an architectural model for the inter computer communications. oOSI model divides the whole task into seven smaller and manageable tasks. Each layer is assigned a particular task. oEach layer is selfcontained, so that task assigned to each layer can be performed independently. ORGANIZATION OF

can be performed independently. ORGANIZATION OF THE OSI LAYERS annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 35 FUNCTIONS OF THE OSI LAYERS 1. PHYSICAL LAYER The physical layer coordinates the functions required to transmit a bit stream over a physical medium. The physical layer is concerned with the following functions: Physical characteristics of interfaces and media  The physical layer defines the characteristics of the interface between the devices and the transmission

interface between the devices and the transmission medium. Representation of bits  To transmit the stream of bits, it must be encoded to signals. The physical layer defines the type of encoding. Signals: It determines the type of the signal used for transmitting the information. Data Rate or Transmission rate  The number of bits sent each second is also defined by the physical layer. Synchronization of bits  The sender and receiver must be synchronized at the bit level. Their clocks must be

at the bit level. Their clocks must be synchronized. Line Configuration  In a pointtopoint configuration, two devices are connected together through a dedicated link. In a multipoint configuration, a link is shared between several devices. Physical Topology  The physical topology defines how devices are connected to make a network. Devices can be connected using a mesh, bus, star or ring topology. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 36Transmission Mode  The physical

Networks Unit1 36Transmission Mode  The physical layer also defines the direction of transmission between two devices: simplex, halfduplex or fullduplex. 2. DATA LINK LAYER It is responsible for transmitting frames from one node to the next node. The other responsibilities of this layer are Framing  Divides the stream of bits received into data units called frames. Physical addressing  If frames are to be distributed to different systems on the network , data link layer adds a header to the

the network , data link layer adds a header to the frame to define the sender and receiver. Flow control If the rate at which the data are absorbed by the receiver is less than the rate produced in the sender ,the Data link layer imposes a flow ctrl mechanism. Error control Used for detecting and retransmitting damaged or lost frames and to prevent duplication of frames. This is achieved through a trailer added at the end of the frame. Medium Access control Used to determine which device has

Access control Used to determine which device has control over the link at any given time. 3. NETWORK LAYER This layer is responsible for the delivery of packets from source to destination. It determines the best path to move data from source to the destination based on the network conditions, the priority of service, and other factors. The other responsibilities of this layer are Logical addressing  If a packet passes the network boundary, we need another addressing system for source and

we need another addressing system for source and destination called logical address. This addressing is used to identify the device on the internet. Routing  Routing is the major component of the network layer, and it determines the best optimal path out of the multiple paths from source to the destination. 4. TRANSPORT LAYER It is responsible for Process to Process delivery. That is responsible for sourceto destination (endtoend) delivery of the entire message, It also ensures whether the

of the entire message, It also ensures whether the message arrives in order or not. The other responsibilities of this layer are Port addressing  Service Point addressing  The header includes an address called port address  service point address. This layer gets the entire message to the correct process on that computer. Segmentation and reassembly  The message is divided into segments and each segment is assigned a sequence number. These numbers are arranged correctly on the arrival side by

are arranged correctly on the arrival side by this layer. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 37Connection control  This can either be connectionless or connection oriented. The connectionless treats each segment as an individual packet and delivers to the destination. The connectionoriented makes connection on the destination side before the delivery. After the delivery the termination will be terminated. Flow control  The transport layer also responsible for flow

The transport layer also responsible for flow control but it is performed endtoend rather than across a single link. Error Control  Error control is performed endtoend rather than across the single link.. 5. SESSION LAYER This layer establishes, manages and terminates connections between applications. The other responsibilities of this layer are Dialog control  Session layer acts as a dialog controller that creates a dialog between two processes or we can say that it allows the communication

or we can say that it allows the communication between two processes which can be either halfduplex or fullduplex. Synchronization Session layer adds some checkpoints when transmitting the data in a sequence. If some error occurs in the middle of the transmission of data, then the transmission will take place again from the checkpoint. This process is known as Synchronization and recovery. 6. PRESENTATION LAYER It is concerned with the syntax and semantics of information exchanged between two

and semantics of information exchanged between two systems. The other responsibilities of this layer are Translation  Different computers use different encoding system, this layer is responsible for interoperability between these different encoding methods. It will change the message into some common format. Encryption and decryptionIt means that sender transforms the original information to another form and sends the resulting message over the nw. and vice versa. Compression and

over the nw. and vice versa. Compression and expansionCompression reduces the number of bits contained in the information particularly in text, audio and video. 7. APPLICATION LAYER This layer enables the user to access the network. It handles issues such as network transparency, resource allocation, etc. This allows the user to log on to remote user. The other responsibilities of this layer are FTAM (File Transfer, Access, Management)  Allows user to access files in a remote host. Mail services

to access files in a remote host. Mail services  Provides email forwarding and storage. Directory services  Provides database sources to access information about various sources and objects. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 38 TCP  IP PROTOCOL SUITE The TCPIP architecture is also called as Internet architecture. It is developed by the US Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) for its packet switched network (ARPANET). TCPIP is a protocol suite used in the

(ARPANET). TCPIP is a protocol suite used in the Internet today. It is a 4layer model. The layers of TCPIP are 1. Application layer 2. Transport Layer (TCPUDP) 3. Internet Layer 4. Network Interface Layer APPLICATION LAYER An application layer incorporates the function of top three OSI layers. An application layer is the topmost layer in the TCPIP model. It is responsible for handling highlevel protocols, issues of representation. This layer allows the user to interact with the application. When

the user to interact with the application. When one application layer protocol wants to communicate with another application layer, it forwards its data to the transport layer. Protocols such as FTP, HTTP, SMTP, POP3, etc running in the application layer provides service to other program running on top of application layer annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 39TRANSPORT LAYER The transport layer is responsible for the reliability, flow control, and correction of data

reliability, flow control, and correction of data which is being sent over the network. The two protocols used in the transport layer are User Datagram protocol and Transmission control protocol. oUDP  UDP provides connectionless service and endtoend delivery of transmission. It is an unreliable protocol as it discovers the errors but not specify the error. oTCP  TCP provides a full transport layer services to applications. TCP is a reliable protocol as it detects the error and retransmits the

as it detects the error and retransmits the damaged frames. INTERNET LAYER The internet layer is the second layer of the TCPIP model. An internet layer is also known as the network layer. The main responsibility of the internet layer is to send the packets from any network, and they arrive at the destination irrespective of the route they take. Internet layer handle the transfer of information across multiple networks through router and gateway . IP protocol is used in this layer, and it is the

. IP protocol is used in this layer, and it is the most significant part of the entire TCPIP suite. NETWORK INTERFACE LAYER The network interface layer is the lowest layer of the TCPIP model. This layer is the combination of the Physical layer and Data Link layer defined in the OSI reference model. It defines how the data should be sent physically through the network. This layer is mainly responsible for the transmission of the data between two devices on the same network. The functions carried

devices on the same network. The functions carried out by this layer are encapsulating the IP datagram into frames transmitted by the network and mapping of IP addresses into physical addresses. The protocols used by this layer are Ethernet, token ring, FDDI, X.25, frame relay. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 40COMPARISON  OSI MODEL AND TCPIP MODEL S.No OSI MODEL TCPIP MODEL 1 Defined before advent of internet Defined after the advent of Internet. 2 Service

Defined after the advent of Internet. 2 Service interface and protocols are clearly distinguished beforeService interface and protocols were not clearly distinguished before 3 Internetworking not supported TCPIP supports Internet working 4 Strict layering Loosely layered 5 Protocol independent standard Protocol Dependant standard 6 Less Credible More Credible 7 All packets are reliably delivered TCP reliably delivers packets, IP does not reliably deliver packets NETWORK PERFORMANCE Network

deliver packets NETWORK PERFORMANCE Network performance is measured in using: Bandwidth, Throughput, Latency, Jitter, RoundTrip Time BANDWIDTH The bandwidth of a network is given by the number of bits that can be transmitted over the network in a certain period of time. Bandwidth can be measured in two different values: bandwidth in hertz and bandwidth in bits per second. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 41Bandwidth in Hertz oBandwidth in hertz refers to the range of

Hertz oBandwidth in hertz refers to the range of frequencies contained in a composite signal or the range of frequencies a channel can pass. oFor example, we can say the bandwidth of a subscriber telephone line is 4 kHz. Bandwidth in Bits per Seconds oBandwidth in Bits per Seconds refers to the number of bits transmitted per second. oFor example, the bandwidth of a network is a maximum of 100 Mbps. This means that this network can send 100 Mbps. Relationship oThere is an explicit relationship

Relationship oThere is an explicit relationship between the bandwidth in hertz and bandwidth in bits per second. oBasically, an increase in bandwidth in hertz means an increase in bandwidth in bits per second. THROUGHPUT Throughput is a measure of how fast we can actually send data through a network. Bandwidth in bits per second and throughput may seem to be same, but they are different. A link may have a bandwidth of B bps, but we can only send T bps through this link. (T always less than B).

T bps through this link. (T always less than B). In other words, the bandwidth is a potential measurement of a link; the throughput is an actual measurement of how fast we can send data. For example, we may have a link with a bandwidth of 1 Mbps, but the devices connected to the end of the link may handle only 200 kbps. This means that we cannot send more than 200 kbps through this link. Problem : A network with bandwidth of 10 Mbps can pass only an average of 12,000 frames per minute with each

an average of 12,000 frames per minute with each frame carrying an average of 10,000 bits. What is the throughput of this network? Solution We can calculate the throughput as The throughput is almost onefifth of the bandwidth in this case. LATENCY (DELAY) The latency or delay defines how long it takes for an entire message to travel from one end of a network to the other. Latency is made up of four components: Propagation time, Transmission time, Queuing time and Processing delay.

time, Queuing time and Processing delay. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 42 Propagation Time oPropagation time measures the time required for a bit to travel from the source to the destination. oThe propagation time is calculated by dividing the distance by the propagation speed. oThe propagation speed of electromagnetic signals depends on the medium and on the frequency of the signal. Transmission Time oIn data communications we dont send just 1 bit, we send a

communications we dont send just 1 bit, we send a message. oThe first bit may take a time equal to the propagation time to reach its destination. oThe last bit also may take the same amount of time. oHowever, there is a time between the first bit leaving the sender and the last bit arriving at the receiver. oThe first bit leaves earlier and arrives earlier. oThe last bit leaves later and arrives later. oThe transmission time of a message depends on the size of the message and the bandwidth of

on the size of the message and the bandwidth of the channel. Queuing Time oQueuing time is the time needed for each intermediate or end device to hold the message before it can be processed. oThe queuing time is not a fixed factor. It changes with the load imposed on the network. When there is heavy traffic on the network, the queuing time increases. oAn intermediate device, such as a router, queues the arrived messages and processes them one by one. oIf there are many messages, each message

by one. oIf there are many messages, each message will have to wait. Processing Delay oProcessing delay is the time that the nodes take to process the packet header. oProcessing delay is a key component in network delay. oDuring processing of a packet, nodes may check for bitlevel errors in the packet that occurred during transmission as well as determining where the packets next destination is. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 43Bandwidth  Delay Product oBandwidth

Unit1 43Bandwidth  Delay Product oBandwidth and delay are two performance metrics of a link. oThe bandwidthdelay product defines the number of bits that can fill the link. oThis measurement is important if we need to send data in bursts and wait for the acknowledgment of each burst before sending the next one. JITTER oAnother performance issue that is related to delay is jitter. oJitter is a problem that if different packets of data encounter different delays and the application using the data

delays and the application using the data at the receiver site is timesensitive (audio and video data, for example). oIf the delay for the first packet is 20 ms, for the second is 45 ms, and for the third is 40 ms, then the realtime application that uses the packets endures jitter. ROUNDTRIP TIME (RTT) oRTT refers to how long it takes to send a message from one end of a network to the other and back, rather than the oneway latency. This is called as roundtrip time (RTT) of the network.

is called as roundtrip time (RTT) of the network. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit1 44SOLVED PROBLEMS  PERFORMANCE Problem 1: What is the propagation time if the distance between the two points is 12,000 km? Assume the propagation speed to be 2.4  108 ms . Solution : Propagation time  (12000  1000)  (2.4  108)  50 ms Problem 2: What are the propagation time and the transmission time for a 2.5KB (kilobyte) message (an email) if the bandwidth of the network is 1 Gbps?

email) if the bandwidth of the network is 1 Gbps? Assume that the distance between the sender and the receiver is 12,000 km and that light travels at 2.4  108 ms. Solution: Propagation time  (12000  1000)  (2.4  108 )  50 ms Transmission time  (2500  8)  109  0.02 ms Problem 3: What are the propagation time and the transmission time for a 5MB (megabyte) message (an image) if the bandwidth of the network is 1 Mbps? Assume that the distance between the sender and the receiver is 12,000 km and that

the sender and the receiver is 12,000 km and that light travels at 2.4  108ms. Solution: Propagation time  (12000  1000)  (2.4  108 )  50 ms Transmission time  (5000000  8)  106  40 s annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 1 1. INTRODUCTION  In the OSI model, the data link layer is the 2nd layer from the bottom.  It is responsible for transmitting frames from one node to next node .  The main responsibility of the Data Link Layer is to transfer the datagram across an

Link Layer is to transfer the datagram across an individua l link.  An important characteristic of a Data Link Layer is that datagram can be handled by different link layer protocols on different links in a path.  The other responsibilities of this layer are o Framing  Divides the stream of bits received into data un its called frames. o Physical addressing  If frames are to be distributed to different systems on the same network, data link layer adds a header to the frame to define the sender

adds a header to the frame to define the sender and receiver. o Flow control  If the rate at which the data are absorbed by the receiver is less than the rate produced in the sender ,the Data link layer imposes a flow control mechanism. o Error control  Used for detecting and retransmitting damaged or lost frames and to prevent duplication of frames. This is achieved through a trail er added at the end of the frame. o Medium Access control  Used to determine which device has control over the

to determine which device has control over the link at any given time. Nodes and Links  Communication at the data link layer is node tonode.  The communication channel that connects the adjace nt nodes is known as links, and in order to move the datagram from source to the destination, the datagram must be moved across an individual link.  A data unit from one point in the Internet needs to pass through many networks (LAN and WAN) to reach anothe r point.  Theses LANs and WANs are connected by

r point.  Theses LANs and WANs are connected by routers.  The two end hosts and the routers are nodes and the networks in between are links . UNIT II : DATA LINK LAYER  MEDIA ACCESS Introduction  Link Layer Addressing  DLC Servi ces  Data Link Layer Protocols  HDLC  PPP  Media Access Control  Wired LANs: Ethernet  Wireless LANs  Introduction  IEEE 802.11, Bluetooth  Connecting Devices annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 2  The first node is the source host; the last

II 2  The first node is the source host; the last node is the destination host.  The other four nodes are four routers .  The first, the third, and the fifth links represent the three LANs; the second and the fourth links represent the two WANs. Two Categories of Links Point  toPoint link and Broadcast link .  In a point topoint link, the link is dedicated to the two devices  In a broadcast link, the link is shared between several pairs of devices. Data Link Layer Services  The data link layer

Data Link Layer Services  The data link layer is located between the physical and the network layers.  The datalink layer provides services to the n etwork layer; it receives services from the physical layer.  When a packet is travelling, the data link layer of a node (host or router) is responsible for delivering a datagram to the next node in the path.  For this purpose, the data link layer of the sending node needs to encapsulate the datagram and the data link layer of the receiving node

and the data link layer of the receiving node needs to decapsulate the datagram.  The datagram received by the data link layer of the source host is encapsulated in a frame.  The frame is logically transported from the source host to the router. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 3  The frame is decapsulated at the data link layer of the router and encapsulated at another frame.  The new frame is logically transported from the router to the destination host.

from the router to the destination host. Sublayers in Data Link layer  We can d ivide the data link layer into two sublayers: data link control (DLC) and media access control (MAC).  The data link control sublayer deals with all issues common to both point  topoint and broadcast links  The media access control sublayer deals only with i ssues specific to broadcast links. 2. LINK LAYER ADDRESSING  A linklayer address is sometimes called a link address , sometimes a physical address , and

link address , sometimes a physical address , and sometimes a MAC address .  Since a link is controlled at the data link layer, the addresses need to belong to the datalink layer.  When a datagram passes from the network layer to the data link layer, the datagram will be encapsulated in a frame and two data link addresses are added to the frame header.  These two addresses are changed every time the frame mov es from one link to another. THREE TYPES OF ADDRESSES The link layer protocols define

TYPES OF ADDRESSES The link layer protocols define three types of addresses: unicast, multicast, and broadcast. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 4 Unicast Address : Each host or each interface of a router is assigned a unicast address. Unicasting me ans onetoone communication. A frame with a unicast address destination is destined only for one entity in the link. Multicast Address : Linklayer protocols define multicast addresses. Multicasting means one to many

addresses. Multicasting means one to many Communication but not all. Broadcast Address : Linklayer protocols define a broadcast address. Broadcasting means one  toall communication. A frame with a destination broadcast address is sent to all entities in the link. ADDRESS RESOLUTION PROTOCOL (ARP) o ARP stands for Address Resolut ion Protocol. o ARP is the most important protocol of the Data Link Layer. o ARP is a network layer protocol used to convert a IP address (NetworkLogical address) into a

a IP address (NetworkLogical address) into a MAC Address (Hardware Physical address). o The computer programsapplications use logic al address (IP address) to sendreceive messages, however the actual communication happens over the physical address (MAC address). o To send a datagram over a network, we need both the logical and physical address. o IP addresses are made up of 32 bits wherea s MAC addresses are made up of 48 bits. o ARP enables each host to build a table of IP address and

each host to build a table of IP address and corresponding physical address. o ARP relies on broadcast support from physical networks. o The Address Resolution Protocol is a request and response proto col. o The types of ARP messages are: 1. ARP request 2. ARP reply annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 5 ARP Operation o ARP maintains a cache table in which MAC addresses are mapped to IP addresses. o If a host wants to send an IP datagram to a host ,it first checks

to send an IP datagram to a host ,it first checks for a mapping in the cache table . o If no mapping is found, it needs to invoke the Address Resolution Protocol over the network. o It does this by broadcasting an ARP query onto the network. o This query contains the target IP address. o Each host receives the query and checks to see if it matche s its IP address. o If it does match, the host sends a response message that contains its link  layer address (MAC Address) back to the originator of

address (MAC Address) back to the originator of the query. o The originator adds the information contained in this response to its ARP table. o For example, To determine system Bs physical (MAC) address, system A broadcasts an ARP request containing Bs IP address to all machines on its network.  o All nodes except the destination discard the packet but update their ARP table. o Destination host (System B)constructs an ARP Response packet o ARP Response is unicast and sent back to the source host

is unicast and sent back to the source host (System A). o Source stores target Logical  Physical address pair in its ARP table from ARP Response. o If target node does not exist on same network, ARP request is sent to default router. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 6 ARP Packet RARP  Reverse ARP o Reverse Address Resolution protocol (RARP) allows a host to convert its MAC address to the corresponding IP address. 3. DLC SERVICES  The data link control (DLC) deals

3. DLC SERVICES  The data link control (DLC) deals with procedures for communication between two adjacent nodes node tonode communication no matter whether the link is dedicated or broadcast.  Data link control service include (1) F raming (2) Flow Contro l (3) E rror Control 1. FRAMING  The data link layer packs the bits of a message into frames, so that each frame is distinguishable from another.  Although the whole message could be packed in one frame, that is not normally done.  One reason

one frame, that is not normally done.  One reason is that a frame can be very large, making flow and error control very inefficient. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 7  When a message is carried in one very large frame, even a single bit error would require the retransmission of the whole frame.  When a message is divided into smaller frames, a si nglebit error affects only that small frame.  Framing in the data link layer separates a message from one source to a

layer separates a message from one source to a destination by adding a sender address and a destination address.  The destination address defines where the packet is to go; the sender address helps the recipient acknowledge the receipt. Frame Size  Frames can be of fixed or variable size.  Frames of fixed size are called cells. In fixed size framing, there is no need for defining the boundaries of the frames; the size itself can be use d as a delimiter.  In variable size framing, we need a way

In variable size framing, we need a way to define the end of one frame and the beginning of the next. Two approaches were used for this purpose: a character oriented approach and a bit oriented approach. Character Oriented Framing  In character oriented (or byte oriented) framing, data to be carried are 8 bit characters.  To separate one frame from the next, an 8 bit (1 byte) flag is added at the beginning and the end of a frame.  The flag, composed of protocol dependent special character s,

of protocol dependent special character s, signals the start or end of a frame.  Any character used for the flag could also be part of the information.  If this happens, when it encounters this pattern in the middle of the data,the receiver thinks it has reached the end of the frame.  To fix t his problem, a bytestuffing strategy was added to character  oriented framing. Byte Stuffing ( or) Character Stuffing  Byte stuffing is the process of adding one extra byte whenever there is a flag or

adding one extra byte whenever there is a flag or escape character in the text.  In byte stuffing , a speci al byte is added to the data section of the frame when there is a character with the same pattern as the flag.  The data section is stuffed with an extra byte. This byte is usually called the escape character (ESC) and has a predefined bit pattern.  Whenev er the receiver encounters the ESC character, it removes it from the data section and treats the next character as data, not as a

and treats the next character as data, not as a delimiting flag. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 8 BitOriented Framing  In bitoriented framing, the data section of a frame is a sequence of bits to be inter preted by the upper layer as text, graphic, audio, video, and so on.  In addition to headers and trailers), we still need a delimiter to separate one frame from the other.  Most protocols use a special 8 bit pattern flag, 01111110, as the delimiter to define

pattern flag, 01111110, as the delimiter to define the beginning and the end of the frame  If the flag pattern appears in the data, the receiver must be informed that this is not the end of the frame.  This is done by stuffing 1 single bit (instead of 1 byte) to prevent the pattern from looking like a flag. The strategy is called bit stuffing. Bit Stuffing  Bit stuffing is the process of adding one extra 0 whenever five consecutive 1s follow a 0 in the data, so that the receiver does not mistake

in the data, so that the receiver does not mistake the pattern 0111110 for a flag.  In bit stuffing, if a 0 an d five consecutive 1 bits are encountered, an extra 0 is added.  This extra stuffed bit is eventually removed from the data by the receiver.  The extra bit is added after one 0 followed by five 1s regardless of the value of the next bit.  This guarantees t hat the flag field sequence does not inadvertently appear in the frame. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks

8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 9 2. FLOW CONTROL o Flow control refers to a set of procedures used to restrict the amount of data that the sender can send before waiting for acknowledgment. o The receiving device has limited speed and limited memory to store the data. o Therefore, the receiving device must be able to inform the sending device to stop the transmission temporarily before the limits are reached. o It requires a buffer, a block of memory for storing the info rmation until they are

memory for storing the info rmation until they are processed. Two methods have been developed to control the flow of data: o StopandWait o Sliding Window o STOP AND WAIT o The simplest scheme is the stop andwait algorithm. o In the Stop andwait method, the sender waits for an acknow ledgement after every frame it sends. o When acknowledgement is received, then only next frame is sent. o The process of alternately sending and waiting of a frame continues until the sender transmits the EOT (End of

until the sender transmits the EOT (End of transmission) frame. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 10 o If the acknowledgeme nt is not received within the allotted time, then the sender assumes that the frame is lost during the transmission, so it will retransmit the frame. o The acknowledgement may not arrive because of the following three scenarios : 1. Original frame is lost 2. ACK is lost 3. ACK arrives after the timeout Advantage of Stop andwait o The Stop

the timeout Advantage of Stop andwait o The Stop andwait method is simple as each frame is checked and acknowledged before the next frame is sent Disadvantage s of Stop AndWait o In stop andwait, at any point in time, there is only one frame that is sent and waiting to be acknowledged. o This is not a good use of transmission medium. o To improve efficiency, multiple frames should be in transition while waiting for ACK. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 11

8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 11 PIGGYBACKING o A method to combine a data frame with ACK. o Piggybacking saves bandwidth o Station A and B both have data to send. o Instead of sending separately, station A sends a data frame that includes an ACK. o Station B does the same thing. SLIDING WINDOW o The Sliding Window is a method of flow control in which a sender can transmit the several frames before getting an acknowledgement. o In Sliding Window Control, multiple frames can be sent one after

Control, multiple frames can be sent one after the another due to which capacity of the communication channel can be utilized efficiently. o A single ACK acknowledge multiple frames. o Sliding Window refers to imaginary boxes at both the sender and receiver end. o The window can hold the frames at either end, and it provides the upper limit on the number of frames that can be transmitted before the acknowledgement. o Frames can be acknowledged even when the window is not completely filled. o The

when the window is not completely filled. o The window has a specific size in which they are numbered as modulo n means that they are numbered from 0 to n 1. o For example, if n  8, the frames are numbered from 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,0,1........ o The size of the window is represented as n 1. Therefore, maximum n 1 frames can be sent before acknowledgement. o When the receiver sends the ACK, it includes the number of the next frame that it wants to receive. o For example, to acknowledge

it wants to receive. o For example, to acknowledge the string of frames ending with frame number 4, the receiver will send the ACK containing the number 5. o When the sender sees the ACK with the number 5, it got to know that the frames from 0 through 4 have been rec eived. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 12 Sender Window Receiver Window  o At the beginning of a transmission, the sender window contains n 1 frames. o When a frame is sent, the size of the window

o When a frame is sent, the size of the window shrinks. o For example, if the size of the wind ow is w and if three frames are sent out, then the number of frames left out in the sender window is w 3. o Once the ACK has arrived, then the sender window expands to the number which will be equal to the number of frames acknowledged by ACK. o At the beg inning of transmission, the receiver window does not contain n frames, but it contains n 1 spaces for frames. o When the new frame arrives, the size

for frames. o When the new frame arrives, the size of the window shrinks. o For examp le, the size of the window is w and if three frames are received then the number of spaces available in the window is (w 3). o Once the acknowledgement is sent, the receiver window expands by the number equal to the number of frames acknowledged. Example of Sliding Window annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 13 3. ERROR CONTROL Data can be corrupted during transmission. For reliable

can be corrupted during transmission. For reliable communication, errors must be detected and corrected. Error Control is a technique of error detection and retransmission. TYPES OF ERRORS SINGLE BIT ERROR The term Single bit error means that only one bit of a given data unit (such as byte, character, data unit or packet) is changed from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1. BURST ERROR The term Burst Error means that two or more bits in the data unit have changed from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1. ERROR DETECTION

from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1. ERROR DETECTION TECHNIQUES  METHODS The basic idea behind any error detection scheme is to add additional information to a frame that can be used to determine if errors have been introduced. PARITY CHECK  One bit, called parity bit is added to every data unit so that the total number of 1s in the data unit become s even (or) odd.  The source then transmits this data via a link, and bits are checked and verified at the destination.  Data is considered accurate if the

destination.  Data is considered accurate if the number of bits (even or odd) matches the number transmitted from the source.  This techniques is the m ost common and least complex method. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 14 1. Even parity  Maintain even number of 1s E.g., 1011  1011 1 2. Odd parity  Maintain odd number of 1s E.g., 1011  1011 0 CYCLIC REDUNDANCY CHECK  Cyclic codes refers to encoding messages by adding a fixed length check value.  CRCs are

by adding a fixed length check value.  CRCs are popular because they are s imple to implement, easy to analyze mathematically and particularly good at detecting common errors caused in transmission channels. Steps Involved :  Consider the original message (dataword) as M(x) consisting of k bits and the divisor as C(x) consists of n1 bits.  The original message M(x) is appended by n bits of zeros. Let us call this zero extended message as T(x).  Divide T(x) by C(x) and find the remainder.  The

Divide T(x) by C(x) and find the remainder.  The division operation is performed using XOR operation.  The resultant remainder is appended to the original message M(x) as CRC and sent by the sender (codeword) . Example 1:  Consider the Dataword  Message M(x)  1001  Divisor C(x)  1 011 (n14)  Appending n zeros to the original Message M(x).  The resultant messages is calle d T(x)  1001 000. (here n3)  Divide T(x) by the divisor C(x) using XOR operation. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591

operation. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 15 Sender Side : Receiver Side: (For Both Case  Without Error and With Error) annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 16 Polynomials  A pattern of 0s and 1s can be represented as a polynomial with coef ficients of 0 and 1.  The power of each term shows the position of the bit; the coefficient shows the value of the bit. INTERNET CHECKSUM  Checksum is a calculated value that is used to determine

is a calculated value that is used to determine the integrity of data. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 17 Example : Let the message t o be transmitted be 7,11,12,0,6. ERROR CONTROL  Error control includes both error detection and error correction.  Whenever an error is detected, specified frames are retransmitted  It allows the receiver to inform the sender if a frame is lost or damage d during transmission and coordinates the retransmission of those frames by

coordinates the retransmission of those frames by the sender.  Includes the following actions: o Error detection o Positive Acknowledgement ( ACK ): if the frame arrived with no errors o Negative Acknowledgement ( NAK ): if the frame arrived with errors o Retransmissions after Timeou t: Frame is retransmitted after certain amount of time if no acknowledgement was received  Error control in the data link layer is based on automatic repeat request (ARQ). Categories of Error Control

repeat request (ARQ). Categories of Error Control annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 18 STOP AND WAIT ARQ  Stopandwait ARQ is a technique used to retransmit the data in case of damaged or lost frames.  This technique works on the principle that the sender will not transmit the next frame until it receives the acknowledgement of the last transmitted frame. Two possibilities of the retransmission in Stop and Wait ARQ : o Damaged Frame: When the receiver receives a

: o Damaged Frame: When the receiver receives a damaged frame (i.e., the frame contains an error ), then it returns the NAK frame. For example, when the frame DATA 1 is sent, and then the receiver sends the ACK 0 frame means that the data 1 has arrived correctly . The sender transmits the next frame: DATA 0. It reaches undamaged, and the receiver returns ACK 1. The sender transmits the third frame: DATA 1. The receiver reports an error and returns t he NAK frame. The sender retransmits the DATA

t he NAK frame. The sender retransmits the DATA 1 frame. o Lost Frame: Sender is equipped with the timer and starts when the frame is transmitted. Sometimes the frame has not arrived at the receiving end so that it can not be acknowledged either positively or negatively. The sender waits for acknowledgement until the timer goes off. If the timer goes off, it retransmits the last transmitted frame. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 19 SLIDING WINDOW ARQ Sliding

Networks Unit  II 19 SLIDING WINDOW ARQ Sliding Window ARQ is a technique used for continuous transmission error control. Two protoco ls used in sliding window ARQ: 1.GO BACK N ARQ o In Go Back N ARQ protocol, if one frame is lost or damaged, then it retransmits all the frames after which it does not receive the positive ACK. o In the above figure, three frames (Data 0,1,2) have been transmitted before an error discovered in the third frame. o The receiver discovers the error in Data 2 frame, so

receiver discovers the error in Data 2 frame, so it returns the NAK 2 frame. o All the frame s including the damaged frame (Data 2,3,4) are discarded as it is transmitted after the damaged frame. o Therefore, the sender retransmits the frames (Data2,3,4) . 2.SELECTIVE REJECT(REPEAT) ARQ o Selective Reject ARQ technique is more eff icient than Go Back n ARQ. o In this technique, only those frames are retransmitted for which negative acknowledgement (NAK) has been received. o The receiver storage

(NAK) has been received. o The receiver storage buffer keeps all the damaged frames on hold until the frame in error is correctly received. o The receiver must have an appropriate logic for reinserting the frames in a correct order. o The sender must consist of a searching mechanism that selects only the requested frame for retransmission. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 20 o In the above figure, three frames (Data 0,1,2) have been transmitted before an error

(Data 0,1,2) have been transmitted before an error discovered in the third frame. o The receiver discovers the error in Data 2 frame, so it returns the NAK 2 frame. o The damaged frame only (Data 2) is discarded. o The other subsequent frames (Data 3,4) are accepted . o Therefore, the sender retransmits only the damaged frame (Data2). 4. DATA LINK LAYER PROTOCOLS Four protocols have been defined for the data link layer controls. They are 1. Simple Protocol 2. StopandWait Protocol 3. GoBack N

Protocol 2. StopandWait Protocol 3. GoBack N Protocol 4. Selective Repeat Protocol 1.SIMPLE PRO TOCOL o The first protocol is a simple protocol with neither flow nor error control. o We assume that the receiver can immediately handle any frame it receives. o In other words, the receiver can never be overwhelmed with incoming frames. o The data link laye rs of the sender and receiver provide transmission services for their network layers. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks

8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 21 o The data link layer at the sender gets a packet from its network layer, makes a frame out of it, and sends the frame. o The data link layer at the receiver receives a fr ame from the link, extracts the packet from the frame, and delivers the packet to its network layer. NOTE : 2. STOP AND WAIT PROTOCOL REFER STOP AND WAIT FROM FLOW CONTROL 3. GOBACK N PROTOCOL REFER GOBACK N ARQ FROM ERROR CONTROL 4. SELECTIVE REPEAT PROTOCOL REFER SELECTIVE REPEAT ARQ FROM

REPEAT PROTOCOL REFER SELECTIVE REPEAT ARQ FROM ERROR CONTROL 5. HDLC (HIGH LEVEL DATA LINK CONTROL) o High level Data Link Control (HDLC) is a bit oriented protocol o HDLC is used for communication over point topoint and multipoint links. o HDLC implements the Stop andWait protocol. HDLC CONFIGURATIONS AND TRANSFER MODES HDLC provides two common transfer modes that can be used in different configurations: 1. Normal response mode (NRM) 2. Asynchronous balanced mode (ABM) .

mode (NRM) 2. Asynchronous balanced mode (ABM) . annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 22 Normal resp onse mode (NRM) o In normal response mode (NRM) , the station configuration is unbalanced. o We have one primary station and multiple secondary stations. o A primary station can send commands; a secondary station can only respond. o The NRM is used for both poi nttopoint and multipoint links. Asynchronous balanced mode (ABM) o In ABM, the configuration is balanced. o

(ABM) o In ABM, the configuration is balanced. o The link is point topoint, and each station can function as a primary and a secondary (acting as peers). o This is the common mode today. HDLC FRA MES HDLC defines three types of frames: 1. Information frames (I frames)  used to carry user data 2. Supervisory frames (S frames)  used to carry control information 3. Unnumbered frames (U frames)  reserved for system management Each type of frame serves as an envelope for the transmission of a

serves as an envelope for the transmission of a different type of message. Each frame in HDLC may contain up to six fields: 1. Beginning flag field 2. Address field 3. Control field 4. Information field (User Information Management Information) 5. Frame check sequence (FCS) fie ld 6. Ending flag field In multiple frame transmissions, the ending flag of one frame can serve as the beginning flag of the next frame. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 23 o Flag field

8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 23 o Flag field  This field contains synchronization pattern 01111110, which identifies both the beginning and the end of a frame. o Address field  This field contains the address of the secondary station. If a primary station created the frame, it contains a  to address. If a secondary station creates the frame, it contains a  from address. The address field can be one byt e or several bytes long, depending on the needs of the network. o Control field. The

on the needs of the network. o Control field. The control field is one or two bytes used for flow and error control. o Information field. The information field contains the users data from the network layer or management inf ormation. Its length can vary from one network to another. o FCS field. The frame check sequence (FCS) is the HDLC error detection field. It can contain either a 16 bit or 32bit CRC. CONTROL FIELD FORMAT FOR THE DIFFERENT FRAME TYPES Control Field for I Frames o Iframes are

TYPES Control Field for I Frames o Iframes are designed to carry user data from the network layer. In addition, they can include flow control and error control information o The first bit defines the type. If the first bit of the control field is 0, this means the frame is an I fram e. o The next 3 bits, called N(S), define the sequence number of the frame. o The last 3 bits, called N(R), correspond to the acknowledgment number when piggybacking is used. o The single bit between N(S) and N(R) is

is used. o The single bit between N(S) and N(R) is called the PF bit. If this bit is 1 it means poll (the frame is sent by a primary station to a secondary). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 24 o If this bit is 0 it means final(the frame is sent by a secondary to a Primary). Control Field for S Frames o Supervisory frames are used for flow and error control whenever piggybacking is either impossible or inappropriate. o Sframes do not have information fields o If

o Sframes do not have information fields o If the first 2 bits of the control field are 10, this means the frame is an S  frame. o The last 3 bits, called N(R),correspond to the acknowledgment number (ACK) or negative acknowledgment number (NAK), depending on the type of Sframe. o The 2 bits called code are used to define the type of S frame itself. o With 2 bits, we can have four types of S frames  Receive ready (RR), Receive not ready (RNR), Reject (REJ) and Selective reject (SREJ). Control

Reject (REJ) and Selective reject (SREJ). Control Field for U Frames o Unnumbered frames are used to exchange session management and control information between connected devices. o Uframes contain an information field, but used only for system management information and not user d ata. o If the first 2 bits of the control field are 11, this means the frame is an U  frame. o Uframe codes are divided into two sections: a 2 bit prefix before the PF bit and a 3 bit suffix after the PF bit. o

the PF bit and a 3 bit suffix after the PF bit. o Together, these two segments (5 bits) can be u sed to create up to 32 different types of U frames. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 25 6. POINT TOPOINT PROTOCOL (PPP) o Point toPoint Protocol (PPP) was devised by IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) in 1990 as a Serial Line Internet Protocol (SLIP). o PPP is a data link layer communications protocol used to establish a direct connection between two nodes. o It

a direct connection between two nodes. o It connects two routers directly without any host or any other networking device in between. o It is used to connect the Home PC to the server of ISP via a modem. o It is a byte  oriented protocol that is widely used in broadband communications having heavy loads and high speeds. o Since it is a data link layer protocol, data is transmitted in frames. It is also known as RFC 1661. Services Provided by PPP The main services provided by Point  to  Point

PPP The main services provided by Point  to  Point Prot ocol are  1. Defining the frame format of the data to be transmitted. 2. Defining the procedure of establishing link between two points and exchange of data. 3. Stating the method of encapsulation of network layer data in the frame. 4. Stating authentication rules of the communicating devices. 5. Providing address for network communication. 6. Providing connections over multiple links. 7. Supporting a variety of network layer protocols by

Supporting a variety of network layer protocols by providing a range os services. PPP Frame PPP is a byte  oriented protocol where each fie ld of the frame is composed of one or more bytes. 1. Flag  1 byte that marks the beginning and the end of the frame. The bit pattern of the flag is 01111110. 2. Address  1 byte which is set to 11111111 in case of broadcast. 3. Control  1 byte set to a constant value of 11000000. 4. Protocol  1 or 2 byte s that define the type of data contained in the payload

define the type of data contained in the payload field. 5. Payload  This carries the data from the network layer. The maximum length of the payload field is 1500 bytes. 6. FCS  It is a 2 byte(16 bit) or 4 bytes(3 2bit) frame check sequence for error detection. The standard code used is CRC . annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 26 Byte Stuffing in PPP Frame Byte stuffing is used is PPP payload field whenever the flag sequence appears in the message, so that the

flag sequence appears in the message, so that the receiver does not consider i t as the end of the frame. The escape byte, 01111101, is stuffed before every byte that contains the same byte as the flag byte or the escape byte. The receiver on receiving the message removes the escape byte before passing it onto the network layer. Transition Phases in PPP The PPP connection goes through different states as shown in a transition phase diagram.  Dead : In dead phase the link is not used. There is no

: In dead phase the link is not used. There is no active carrier and the line is quiet.  Establish : Connection goes into this phase when on e of the nodes start communication. In this phase, two parties negotiate the options. If negotiation is successful, the system goes into authentication phase or directly to networking phase.  Authenticate : This phase is optional. The two nodes may decide whether they need this phase du ring the establishment phase . If they decide to proceed with

phase . If they decide to proceed with authentication, they send several authentication packets. If the result is successful, the connection goes to the networking phase; otherwise, it goes to the termina tion phase.  Network : In network phase, negotiation for the network layer protocols takes place.PPP specifies that two nodes establish a network layer agreement before data at the network layer can be exchanged. This is because PPP supports several protocol s at network layer. If a node is

several protocol s at network layer. If a node is running multiple protocols simultaneously at the network layer, the receiving node needs to know which protocol will receive the data.  Open : In this phase, data transfer takes place. The connection remains in this phase unt il one of the endpoints wants to end the connection.  Terminate : In this phase connection is terminated. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 27 Components Protocols of PPP Three sets of

II 27 Components Protocols of PPP Three sets of componentsprotocols are defined to make PPP powerful:  Link Control Protocol (LCP)  Authentication Protocols ( AP)  Network Control Protocols (NCP ) Link Control Protocol (LCP)  It is responsible for establishing, configuring, testing, maintaining and terminating links for transmission. It also provides negotiation mechanisms to set options between the two endpoin ts. Both endpoints of the link must reach an agreement about the options before the

reach an agreement about the options before the link can be established. Authentication Protocols (AP)  Authentication means validating the identity of a user who needs to access a set of resources. PPP has created two protocols for authentication Password Authentication Protocol and Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol. PAP The Password Authentication Protocol (PAP) is a simple authentication procedure with a two step process: a. The user who wants to access a system sends an

a. The user who wants to access a system sends an authentication identification (usually the user name) and a password. b. The system checks the validity of the identification and password and either accepts or denies connection. CHAP The Challenge Handshake Authentication Pr otocol (CHAP) is a three way handshaking authentication protocol that provides greater security than PAP. In this method, the password is kept secret; it is never sent online. a. The system sends the user a challenge packet

a. The system sends the user a challenge packet containing a challenge value. b. The user applies a predefined function that takes the challenge value and the users own password and creates a result. The user sends the result in the response packet to the system. c. The system does the same. It applies the same fun ction to the password of the user (known to the system) and the challenge value to create a result. If the result created is the same as the result sent in the response packet, access

as the result sent in the response packet, access is granted; otherwise, it is denied. CHAP is more sec ure than PAP, especially if the system continuously changes the challenge value. Even if the intruder learns the challenge value and the result, the password is still secret. Network Control Protocols (NCP)  PPP is a multiple network layer protocol. It can carry a network layer data packet from protocols defined by the Internet. PPP annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit

8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 28 has defined a specific Network Control Protocol for each network protocol. These protocols are used for negotiating the parame ters and facilities for the network layer. For every higher layer protocol supported by PPP, one NCP is there. 7. MEDIA ACCESS CONTROL (MAC)  When two or more nodes transmit data at the same time, their frames will collide and the link bandwidth is wasted during collision.  To coordinate the access of multiple sendingreceiving nodes to

the access of multiple sendingreceiving nodes to the shared link, we need a protocol to coordinate the transmission.  These protocols are called Medium or Multiple Access Control (MAC) Protocols. MAC belongs to the data lin k layer of OSI model  MAC defines rules for orderly access to the shared medium. I t tries to ensure that no two nodes are interfering with each others transmissions, and deals with the situation when they do. Issues involved in MAC The key issues invo lved are   Where the

in MAC The key issues invo lved are   Where the control is exercised  refers to whether the control is exercised in a centralized or distributed manner  How the control is exercised  refers to in what manner the control is exercised Goals of MAC 1. Fairness in sharing 2. Efficient sharing of bandwidth 3. Need to avoid packet collisions at the receiver due to interference MAC Management  Medium allocation (collision avoidance)  Contention resolution (collision handling)

Contention resolution (collision handling) annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 29 MAC Types  Round Robin :  Each station is given opportunity to transmit in turns. Either a central controller polls a station to permit to go, or stations can coordinate among themselves.  Reservation :  Station wishing to transmit makes reservations for time slots in advance. (Centralized or distributed).  Content ion (Random Access) :  No control on who tries; If collision occurs,

:  No control on who tries; If collision occurs, retransmission takes place. MECHANISM S USED  Wired Networks : o CSMA  CD  Carrier Sense Multiple Access  Collision Detection  Wireless Networks : o CSMA  CA  Carrier Sense Multiple Access  Collision Avoidance CARRIER SENSE MULTIPLE ACCESS  COLLISION DETECTION (CSMA  CD)  Carrier Sense in CSMACD means that all the nodes sense the medium to check whether it is idle or busy.  If the carrier sensed is idle, then the node transmits the entire frame.

idle, then the node transmits the entire frame.  If the carrier sensed is busy, the transmission is postponed.  Collision Detect means that a node listens as it transmits and can therefore detect when a frame it is transmitting has collided with a frame transmitted by another node. Flowchart of CSMACD Operation annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 30 Transmitter Algorithm in CSMACD  Transmitter Algorithm defines the procedures for a node that senses a busy medium.

procedures for a node that senses a busy medium.  Three types of Transmitter Algorithm exist .  They are 1. NonPersistent Strategy 2. Persistent Strategy : 1Persis tent  PPersistent NonPersistent Strategy  In the nonpersistent method, a station that has a frame to send senses the line.  If the line is idle, it sends immediately.  If the line is not idle, it waits a random amount of time and then senses the line again.  The non persistent approach reduces the chance of collision because it is

reduces the chance of collision because it is unlikely that two or more stations will wait the same amount of time and retry to send simultaneously.  However, this method reduces the efficiency of the network becaus e the medium remains idle when there may be stations with frames to send. Persistent Strategy 1Persistent :  The 1persistent method is simple and straightforward.  In this method, after the station finds the line idle, it sends its frame immediately (wit h probability 1).  This

its frame immediately (wit h probability 1).  This method has the highest chance of collision because two or more stations may find the line idle and send their frames immediately. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 31 PPersistent :  In this method, after the station finds the line idle it follows these steps:  With probability p, the station sends its frame.  With probability q  1  p, the station waits for the beginning of the next time slot and checks the line

of the next time slot and checks the line again.  The p persistent method is used if the channel has time slots with a slot duration equal to or greater than the maximum propagation time.  The ppersistent approa ch combines the advantages of the other two strategies. It reduces the chance of collision and improves efficiency. . EXPONENTIAL BACK OFF  Once an adaptor has detected a collision and stopped its transmission, it waits a certain amount of time and tries again.  Each time it tries to

of time and tries again.  Each time it tries to transmit but fails, the adaptor doubles the amount of time it waits before trying again.  This strategy of doubling the delay interval between each retransmission attempt is a general technique known as exponential back off. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 32 CARRIER SENSE MULTIPLE ACCESS  COLLISION AVOIDANCE (CSMACA)  Carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMACA) was invented for wireless

avoidance (CSMACA) was invented for wireless networks.  Wireless protocol would follow exactly the same algorithm as the Ethernet Wait until the l ink becomes idle before transmitting and back off should a collision occur.  Collisions are avoided through the use of CSMACAs three strategies: the interframe space, the contention window, and acknowledgments Interframe Space (IFS)  First, collisions are avoided by deferring transmission even if the channel is found idle. When an idle channel is

the channel is found idle. When an idle channel is found, the station does not send immediately. It waits for a period of time called the interframe space or IFS. Contention Window  The contention window is an amount of time divided into slots. A station that is ready to send chooses a random number of slots as its wait time. The number of slots in the window changes according to the binary exponential backoff strategy. This means that it is set to one slot the first time and then doubles each

to one slot the first time and then doubles each time the station cannot detect an idle channel after the IFS time. Acknowledgment  In addition, the data may be corrupted during the transmission.The positive acknowledgment and the time out timer can help guarantee that the receiver has received the frame. 8. WIRED LAN : ETHERNET ( IEEE 802.3)  Ethernet was developed in the mid 1970s at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC),  IEEE controls the Ethernet standards.  The Ethernet is the most

the Ethernet standards.  The Ethernet is the most successful local area netw orking technology, that uses bus topology.  The Ethernet is multiple access networks that is set of nodes send and receive frames over a shared link.  Ethernet uses the CSMA  CD ( Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection) mechanism. EVOLUTIO N OF ETHERNET annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 33 Standard Ethernet (10 Mbps) The original Ethernet technology with the data rate of

original Ethernet technology with the data rate of 10 Mbps as the Standard Ethernet. Standard Ethernet types are 1. 10Base5: Thick Ethernet , 2. 10Base2: Thin Ethernet , 3. 10Base T: Twisted Pair Ethernet 4. 10Base F: Fiber Ethernet. 10Base5: Thick Ethernet  The first implementation is called 10Base5, thick Ethernet, or Thicknet.  10Base5 was the first Ethernet specification to use a bus topology with an external transceiver (transmitterreceiver) connected via a ta p to a thick coaxial cable.

connected via a ta p to a thick coaxial cable. 10Base2: Thin Ethernet  The second implementation is called 10Base2, thin Ethernet, or Cheapernet.  10Base2 also uses a bus topology, but the cable is much thinner and more flexible.  In this case, the transceiver is normally part of the network interface card (NIC), which is installed inside the station. 10Base T: Twisted Pair Ethernet  The third implementation is called 10Base T or twisted pair Ethernet.  10Base T uses a physical star topology.

Ethernet.  10Base T uses a physical star topology. The stations are connected to a hub via two pairs of twisted cable. 10Base F: Fiber Ethernet  Although there are several types of optical fiber 10 Mbps Ethernet, the most common is called 10Base F.  10Base F uses a star topology to connect stations to a hub.  The stations are conne cted to the hub using two fiber optic cables. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 34 Fast Ethernet (100 Mbps) Fast Ethernet or 100BASE T

Ethernet (100 Mbps) Fast Ethernet or 100BASE T provides transmission speeds up to 100 megabits per second and is typically used for LAN backbone systems. The 100BASE T standard consists of three diff erent component specifications  1. 100 BASE TX 2. 100BASE T4 3. 100BASE FX 100 BASE TX 100Base TX uses two pairs of twisted pair cable either UTP or STP. A 100Base TX network can provide a data rate of 100 Mbps. 100BASE T4 A new standard, called 100Base T4, was designed to use four pairs of UTP for

T4, was designed to use four pairs of UTP for transmitting 100 Mbps. 100BASE FX 100Base FX uses two pairs of fiber optic cables. Optical fiber can easily handle high bandwidth requirements. Gigabit Ethernet (1 Gbps)  The Gigabit Ethernet upgrades the data r ate to 1 Gbps (1000 Mbps) .  Gigabit Ethernet can be categorized as either a two wire or a four wire implementation.  The two wire implementations use fiber optic cable ( 1000Base SX, short  wave, or 1000Base LX, longwave), or STP ( 1000Base

wave, or 1000Base LX, longwave), or STP ( 1000Base CX).  The four wire version uses category 5 twisted pair cable ( 1000Base T). 10 Gigabit Ethernet(10 Gbps)  10 Gigabit Ethernet is an upcoming Ethernet technology that transmits at 10 Gbps.  10 Gigabit Ethernet enables a familiar network technology to be used in LAN, MAN and WAN architectures.  10 Gigabit Ethernet uses multimode optical fiber up to 300 meters and single mode fiber up to 40 kilometers.  Four implementations are the most common:

Four implementations are the most common: 10GBase SR, 10GBase LR, 10GBase EW, and 10GBase X4. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 35 ACCESS METHOD PROTOCOL OF ETHERNET The access method of Ethernet is CSMACD. Note : Refer CSMACD from MAC COLLISION DETECTION IN ETHERNET  As the Ethernet supports collision detection, senders are able to determine a collision.  At the moment an adaptor detects th at its frame is colliding with another, it first makes sure to transmit

with another, it first makes sure to transmit a 32bit jamming sequence along with the 64 bit preamble (totally 96 bits) and then stops the transmission.  These 96 bits are sometimes called Runt Frame. FRAME FORMAT OF ETHERNET The Ethernet frame is defined by the format given in the Fig.  The 64 bit preamble allows the receiver to synchronize with the signal; it is a sequence of alternating 0s and 1s.  Both the source and destination hosts are identified with a 48 bit address .  The packet type

with a 48 bit address .  The packet type field serves as the demultiplexing key.  Each frame contains up to 1500 bytes of data(Body) .  CRC is used for Error detection Ethernet Addresses  Every Ethernet host has a unique Ethernet address (48 bits  6 bytes).  Ethernet address is represented by sequence of six numbers separated by colons.  Each number corresponds to 1 byte of the 6 byte address and is given by pair of hexadecimal digits.  Eg: 8:0:2b:e4:b1:2 is the representation of 00001000

8:0:2b:e4:b1:2 is the representation of 00001000 00000000 00101011 11100100 10110001 00000010  Each frame transmitted on an Ethernet is received by every adaptor connected to the Ethernet.  In addition to unicast addresses an Ethernet address consisting of all 1s is treated as broadcast address.  Similarly the address that has the first bit set to 1 but it is not the broadcast address is called multicast address. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 36 ADVANTAGES OF

8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 36 ADVANTAGES OF ETHERNET Ethernets are successful because  It is extremely easy to administer and maintain . There are no switches that can fail, no routing or configuration t ables that have to be kept up todate, and it is easy to add a new host to the network.  It is inexpensive: Cable is cheap, and the only other cost is the network adaptor on each host. 9. WIRELESS LAN ( IEEE 802.11 )  Wireless communication is one of the fastest growing technologies.  The

is one of the fastest growing technologies.  The demand for connecting devices without the use of cables is increasing everywhere.  Wireless LANs can be found on college campuses, in office buildings, and in many public areas. ADVANTAGES OF WLAN  802.11 1. Flexibil ity: Within radio coverage, nodes can access each other as radio waves can penetrate even partition walls. 2. Planning : No prior planning is required for connectivity as long as devices follow standard convention 3. Design : Allows

follow standard convention 3. Design : Allows to design and develop mob ile devices. 4. Robustness : Wireless network can survive disaster. If the devices survive, communication can still be established. DISADVANTAGES OF WLAN  802.11 1. Quality of Service : Low bandwidth (1  10 Mbps), higher error rates due to interference , delay due to error correction and detection. 2. Cost : Wireless LAN adapters are costly compared to wired adapters. 3. Proprietary Solution : Due to slow standardization

Proprietary Solution : Due to slow standardization process, many solution are proprietary that limit the homogeneity of operation. 4. Restrictio n : Individual countries have their own radio spectral policies. This restricts the development of the technology 5. Safety and Security : Wireless Radio waves may interfere with other devices. Eg; In a hospital , radio waves may interfere with high tech equipment. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 37 TECHNOLOGY USED IN

Computer Networks Unit  II 37 TECHNOLOGY USED IN WLAN  802.11  WLANs uses Spread Spectrum (SS) technology .  The idea behind Spread spectrum technique is to spread the signal over a wider frequency band than normal, so as to minimize the impact of interference from othe r devices.  There are two types of Spread Spectrum :  Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS)  Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS) Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS)  Frequency hopping is a spread spectrum technique

Frequency hopping is a spread spectrum technique that involves transmitting the si gnal over a random sequence of frequencies.  That is, first transmitting at one frequency, then a second, then a third, and so on.  The random sequence of frequencies is computed by a pseudorandom number generator.  The receiver uses the same algorithm as t he sender and initializes it with the same seed and hence is able to hop frequencies in sync with the transmitter to correctly receive the frame. Direct

transmitter to correctly receive the frame. Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS)  Each bit of data is represented by multiple bits in the transmitted signal.  DSSS takes a user data stream and performs an XOR operation with a pseudo random number.  This pseudo random number is called as chipping sequence . annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 38 TOPOLOGY IN WLAN  802.11 WLANs can be built with either of the following two topologies architecture :  Infra Structure

two topologies architecture :  Infra Structure Network Topology  Ad Hoc Network Topology Infra Structure Topology (AP based Topology)   An infrastructure network is the network architecture for providing communication between wireless clients and wired network resources.  The transition of data from the wireless to wired medium occurs via a Base Station called AP(Access Point).  An AP and its associated wireless clients define the coverage area.  AdHoc Topology (Peer toPeer Topology)  An adhoc

AdHoc Topology (Peer toPeer Topology)  An adhoc network is the architecture that is used to support mutual communication between wireless clients.  Typically, an ad  hoc network is created spontaneously and does not support access to wired networks.  An adhoc network does not require an AP. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 39 ARCHITECURE OF WLAN  802.11  The standard defines two kinds of services: the Basic Service Set (BSS) and the Extended Service Set (ESS).

Set (BSS) and the Extended Service Set (ESS). Basic Service Set (BSS)  IEEE 802.11 defines the basic service set (BSS) as the building blocks of a wireless LAN.  A basic service set is made of stati onary or mobile wireless stations and an optional central base station, known as the access point (AP) . Extended Service Set (ESS)  An extended service set (ESS) is made up of two or more BSSs with APs.  In this case, the BSSs are connected through a distribution system, which is a wired or a

a distribution system, which is a wired or a wireless network.  The distribution system connects the APs in the BSSs. The extended service set uses two types of stations: mobile and stationary.  The mobile stations are normal stations inside a BSS.  The stationa ry stations are AP stations that are part of a wired LAN. Station Types IEEE 802.11 defines three types of stations based on their mobility in a wireless LAN: 1. Notransition  A station with notransition mobility is either stationary

with notransition mobility is either stationary (not moving) or m oving only inside a BSS. 2. BSStransition  A station with BSStransition mobility can move from one BSS to another, but the movement is confined inside one ESS ESStransition  A station with ESStransition mobility can move from one ESS to another. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 40 COL LISION AVOIDANCE IN WLAN  802.11 Wireless protocol would follow exactly the same algorithm as the Ethernet Wait

exactly the same algorithm as the Ethernet Wait until the link becomes idle before transmitting and back off should a collision occur. Hidden Node Problem  Consider the situation shown i n the Figure.  Here A and C are both within range of B but not with each other.  Suppose both A and C want to communicate with B and so they each send a frame to B.  A and C are unaware of each other since their signals do not carry that far.  These two fra mes collide with each other at B, but neither A nor C

collide with each other at B, but neither A nor C is aware of this collision.  A and C are said to be hidden nodes with respect to each other. Exposed Node Problem  Each of the four nodes is able to send and receive signals that reach just the nodes to its immediate left and right.  For example, B can exchange frames with A and C but it cannot reach D, while C can reach B and D but not A. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 41  Suppose B is sending to A. Node C is

Unit  II 41  Suppose B is sending to A. Node C is aware of this communication because it hears Bs transmission.  If at the sa me time, C wants to transmit to node D.  It would be a mistake, however, for C to conclude that it cannot transmit to anyone just because it can hear Bs transmission.  This is not a problem since Cs transmission to D will not interfere with As ability t o receive from B.  This is called exposed problem.  Although B and C are exposed to each others signals, there is no

C are exposed to each others signals, there is no interference if B transmits to A while C transmits to D. MULTIPLE ACCESS WITH COLLISION AVOIDANCE (MACA)  MACA is used to avoid collisions caused by the hidden terminal problem and exposed terminal problem.  MACA uses short signaling packets called RTS and CTS for collision avoidance.  The RTS and CTS signals helps us to determine who else is in the transmission range or who is busy.  When a s ender wants to transmit, it sends a signal called

ender wants to transmit, it sends a signal called Request ToSend (RTS).  If the receiver allows the transmission, it replies to the sender a signal called Clear ToSend (CTS).  Any node that sees the CTS frame knows that it is close to the receiver, and therefore cannot transmit for the period of time.  Any node that sees the RTS frame but not the CTS frame is not close enough to the receiver to interfere with it, and so is free to transmit.  The Signaling packets RTS and CTS contains information

Signaling packets RTS and CTS contains information such a s  sender address  receiver address  length of the data to be sentreceived  The receiver sends an ACK to the sender after successfully receiving a frame.  All nodes must wait for this ACK before trying to transmit. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 42  When two or more nodes detect an idle link and try to transmit an RTS frame at the same time, their RTS frames will collide with each other.  802.11 do not

will collide with each other.  802.11 do not support collision detection, but instead, the senders realize the collision has happened when they do not receive the CTS frame after a pe riod of time.  Each node waits for a random amount of time before trying again.  The amount of time a given node delays is defined by exponential back off algorithm. DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM IN WLAN  802.11 In wireless network, nodes can move freely. Some no des are allowed to roam and some are connected to a wired

allowed to roam and some are connected to a wired network infrastructure called access points (AP) , and they are connected to each other by a so called distribution system .  Two nodes can communicate directly with each other if they are within reach of each other,  When the nodes are at different range, for example when node A wish to communicate with node E, A first sends a frame to its access point (AP 1), which forwards the frame across the distribution system to AP 3, which finally

the distribution system to AP 3, which finally transmits the frame to E. Scanning Process in Distribution System  The technique for selecting an Access Point is called scanning .  Scanning will take place whenever a node joins the network as well as when it is not satisfied with the current access point signal.  It involves the following four steps:  The node sends a Probe Request frame.  All APs within reach reply with a Probe Response frame.  The node selects one of the access points and sends

node selects one of the access points and sends that AP an Association Request frame. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 43  The AP replies with an Associatio n Response frame.  There are two types of Scanning. They are 1. Active Scanning 2. Passive Scanning Active Scanning When node C moves from the cell serviced by AP 1 to the cell serviced by AP 2. As it moves, it sends Probe frames, which eventually result in Pro be Response. Since the node is actively

in Pro be Response. Since the node is actively searching for an access point it is called active scanning. Passive Scanning APs periodically send a Beacon frame to the nodes that advertises the capabilities of the access point which includes the transmission rates supported by the AP. This is called passive scanning and a node can change to this AP based on the Beacon frame simply by sending it an Association Request frame back to the access point. FRAME FORMAT OF WLAN  802.11  Control field

FRAME FORMAT OF WLAN  802.11  Control field  contains thr ee subfields :  Type field  Indicates whether the frame carries data, RTS or CTS frame  To DS  Data frame sent to DS  From DS  ACK sent from DS annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 44 When both the DS bits are set to 0, it indicates that one node is sending directly to another . Addr l iden tifies the target node and Addr2 identifies the source node. When both the DS bits are set to 1, it indicates that one

the DS bits are set to 1, it indicates that one node is sending the message to another indirectly using the distribution system.  Duration  contains the duration of time the medium is occupied by the nodes.  Addr l  identifies the final original destination  Addr 2  identifies the immediate sender (the one that forwarded the frame from the distribution system to the ultimate destination)  Addr 3  identifies the intermediate desti nation (the one that accepted the frame from a wireless node and

that accepted the frame from a wireless node and forwarded it across the distribution system)  Addr 4  identifies the original source  Sequence Control  to avoid duplication of frames sequence number is assigned to each frame  Payload  Data from sender to receiver  CRC  used for Error detection of the frame.  10. BLUETOOTH (IEEE 802.15.1 )  A Bluetooth is an ad hoc network, which means that the network is formed spontaneously.  Bluetooth is a wireless LAN technology designed to connect devices

LAN technology designed to connect devices of different functions such as telephones, notebooks, computers (desktop and laptop), cameras, printers, when they are at a short distance from each othe r.  Bluetooth technology is the implementation of a protocol defined by the IEEE 802.15 standard.  The standard defines a wireless personal area network (PAN)  Bluetooth operates in the 2.4 GHz Unlicensed ISM band.  The range for Bluetooth communication is 0 30 feet (10 meters).  This distance can be

is 0 30 feet (10 meters).  This distance can be increased to 100 meters by amplifying the power.  Bluetooth links have typical bandwidths around 1 to 3 Mbps.  Bluetooth is specified by an industry consortium called the Bluetooth Special Interest Group.  Upto eight devices can be connected through Bluetooth.  One device will function as a Master and the other seven devices will function as slaves.  Bluetooth uses Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS) to avoid any interference.  Bluetooth

(FHSS) to avoid any interference.  Bluetooth supports two kinds of links :  Asynchronous Connectionless (ACL) links  for data  Synchronous Connection oriented (SCO) links  for audiovoice annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 45 BLUETOOTH ARCHITECTURE Bluetooth defines two types of networks: Piconet and Scatternet. PICONET  The basic Bluetooth network configuration is called a Piconet  A Piconet is a collection of eight bluetooth devices which are synchronized.  One

bluetooth devices which are synchronized.  One device in the piconet can act as Primary ( Master ), all other devices connected to the master act as Secondary (Slaves).  All the secondary stations synchronize their clocks and hopping sequence with the primary.  Any communication is between the primary master and a secondary slave .  The communication between the primary and secondary stations can be onetoone or one tomany.  The slaves do not communicate directly with each other .  The devices in

directly with each other .  The devices in a piconet can be in any one of the three types states .  They are  Active Device  State 1. Connected to the piconet and partici pates in the communication. 2. Can be a Master or a Slave device. 3. All active devices are assigned a 3 bit address (AMA).  Parked Device  State 1. Connected to the piconet, but does not actively articipate in the communication. 2. More than 200 devices can be pa rked. 3. All parked devices use an 8 bit parked member address

parked devices use an 8 bit parked member address (PMA).  Stand by Device  State 1. Not connected to the piconet. 2. They do not participate in the piconet currently but may take part at a later time. 3. Devices in stand by do not need an address. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 46  If a parked device wants to communicate and there are already seven active slaves, one slave has to switch to park state to allow the parked device to switch to active state.

allow the parked device to switch to active state. SCATTERNET  Piconets can be combined to form what is called a scatternet.  Many pico nets with overlapping coverage can exist simultaneously ,called Scatternet.  A secondary station in one piconet can be the primary in another piconet.  This station can receive messages from the primary in the first piconet (as a secondary) and, acting as a primary, deliver them to secondaries in the second piconet.  A station can be a member of two piconets.

A station can be a member of two piconets.  In the example given below, there are two piconets, in which one slave particip ates in two different piconets.  Master of one piconet cannot act as the master of another piconet.  But the Master of one piconet can act as a Slave in another piconet annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 47 BLUETOOTH LAYERS Radio Layer  The radio layer is roughly equivalent to the physical layer of the Internet model.  Bluetooth uses the

layer of the Internet model.  Bluetooth uses the frequency hopping sprea d spectrum (FHSS) method in the physical layer to avoid interference from other devices or other networks.  Bluetooth hops 1600 times per second, which means that each device changes its modulation frequency 1600 times per second.  To transform bits to a s ignal, Bluetooth uses a sophisticated version of FSK, called GFSK. Baseband Layer  The baseband layer is roughly equivalent to the MAC sublayer in LANs.  The access

to the MAC sublayer in LANs.  The access method is TDMA.  The primary and secondary stations communicate with each other using time s lots. The length of a time slot is exactly 625 s.  During that time, a primary sends a frame to a secondary, or a secondary sends a frame to the primary. L2CAP  The Logical Link Control and Adaptation Protocol, or L2CAP (L2 here means LL) is equivalent to the LLC sublayer in LANs.  It is used for data exchange on an ACL link.  SCO channels do not use L2CAP .  The

an ACL link.  SCO channels do not use L2CAP .  The L2CAP functions are : multiplexing, segmentation and reassembly, quality of service (QoS), and group management. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 48 11. CONNECTING DEVICE S  Connecting devices are used to connect hosts together to make a network or to connect networks together to make an internet.  Connecting devices can operate in different layers of the Internet model.  Connecting devices are divided into five

model.  Connecting devices are divided into five different categories on the basis of layers in which they operate in the network. 1. Devices which operate below the physical layer  Passive hub . 2. Devices which operate at the physical layer  Repeater . 3. Devices which operate at the physical and data link la yers  Bridge . 4. Devices which operate at the physical layer, data link layer and network layer  Router . 5. Devices which operate at all five layers  Gateway .

which operate at all five layers  Gateway . annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 49 1. HUBS  Several networks need a central location to connect media segments together. These central locations are called as hubs .  The hub organizes the cables and transmits incoming signals to the other media segments. The th ree types of hubs are: i) Passive hub  It is a connector, which connects wires coming from the different branches.  By using passive hub, each computer can

branches.  By using passive hub, each computer can receive the signal which is sent from all other computers connected in the hub. ii) Active Hub  It is a multiport repeater, which can regenerate the signal.  It is used to create connections between two or more stations in a physical star topology. iii) Intelligent Hub  Intelligent hub contains a program of network management and intelligent path selection . 2. REPEATERS  A repeater receives the signal and it regenerates the signal in original

signal and it regenerates the signal in original bit pattern before the signal gets too weak or corrupted.  It is used to extend the physical distance of LAN.  Repeater works on physical layer.  A repeater has no filte ring capability .  A repeater is implemented in computer networks to expand the coverage area of the network, repropagate a weak or broken signal and or service remote nodes.  Repeaters amplify the receivedinput signal to a higher frequency domain so that i t is reusable, scalable

frequency domain so that i t is reusable, scalable and available. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 50  Repeaters are also known as signal boosters or range extender.  A repeater cannot connect two LANs, but it connects two segments of the same LAN. 3.BRIDGES  Bridges operate in physical layer as well as data link layer .  As a physical layer device, they regenerate the receive signal.  As a data link layer, the bridge checks the physical (MAC) address (of the

bridge checks the physical (MAC) address (of the source and the destination) contained in the frame.  The bridge has a filtering feature.  It can check the destinati on address of a frame and decides, if the frame should be forwarded or dropped.  Bridges are used to connect two or LANs working on the same protocol. Types of Bridges :  Transparent Bridges These are the bridge in which the stations are completely una ware of the bridges existence i.e. whether or not a bridge is added or deleted

i.e. whether or not a bridge is added or deleted from the network , reconfiguration of the stations is unnecessary. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 51  Source Routing Bridges In these bridges, routing operation is performed by source station and the frame s pecifies which route to follo w.  Translation Bridges These bridges co nnect networks with different architectures, such as Ethernet and Token Ring . These bridges appear as:  Transparent bridges to an

bridges appear as:  Transparent bridges to an Ethernet host  Source routing bridges to a Token Ring host 4. SWITCHES  A switch is a small hardware device which is used to join multiple computers together with one local area network (LAN).  A switch is a mechanism that allows us to interconnect links to form a large network.  Switch is data link layer device.  A switch is a multi port bridge with a buffer .  Switches are used to forward the packets based on MAC addresses.  It is operated in full

based on MAC addresses.  It is operated in full duplex mode.  Packet collision is minimum as it directly communicates between source and destination.  It does not broadcast the message as it works with limited bandwidth.  A switchs primary job is to receive incoming packets on one of its links and to transmit them on some other link.  A Switch is used to transfer the data only to the device that has been addressed. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 52  Input ports

8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 52  Input ports receive stream of packets, analyzes the header, determines the output port and passes the packet onto the fabric.  Ports contain buffers to hold packets before it is forwarded.  If buffer space is unavailable, then packets are dr opped.  If packets at several input ports queue for a single output port, then only one of them is forwarded. Types of Switch i) Two  Layer Switch  The two layer switch performs at the physical and the data link layer.

performs at the physical and the data link layer.  It is a bridge with many ports and design allows faster performs.  A bridge is used to connect different LANs together.  The two  layer switch can make a filtering decision bases on the MAC address of the received frame. However, two  layer switch has a buff er which holds the frame for processing. ii) Three  Layer Switch  The three layer switch is a router.  The switching fabric in a three layer allows a faster table lookup and forwarding

layer allows a faster table lookup and forwarding mechanism. 5.ROUTERS  A router is a three layer device.  It operates in the physical, data link, and network layers.  As a physical layer device, it regenerates the signal it receives.  As a link layer device, the router checks the physical addresses (source and destination) contained in the packet.  As a network layer device, a router checks the network layer addresses.  A router is a device like a switch that routes data packets based on their

a switch that routes data packets based on their IP addresses.  A router can connect networks. A router connects the LANs and WANs on the internet.  A router is an internetworking device .  It connects independent networks to form an internetwork.  The key function of the router is to determine the shortest path to the destination.  Router has a routing table, which is used to make decision on selecting the route. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS 8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 53  The routing

8591  Computer Networks Unit  II 53  The routing table is upd ated dynamically based on which they make decisions on routing the data packets. 6.GATEWAY  A gateway is a device, which operates in all five layers of the internet or seven layers of OSI model.  It is usually a combination of hardware and software.  Gateway connects two independent networks.  Gateways are generally more complex than switch or router.  Gateways basically works as the messenger agents that take data from one system,

messenger agents that take data from one system, interpret it, and transfer it to another system.  Gateways are also called prot ocol converters  A gateway accepts a packet formatted for one protocol and converts it to a packet formatted to another protocol before forwarding it.  The gateway must adjust the data rate, size and data format. 7.BROUTER  Brouter is a h ybrid device . It combines the features of both bridge and router.  Brouter is a combination of Bridge and Router.  Functions as a

combination of Bridge and Router.  Functions as a bridge for nonroutable protocols and a router for routable protocols .  As a router, it is capable of routing packets across networks.  As a bridge, it is capable of filtering local area network traffic.  Provides the best attributes of both a bridge and a router  Operates at both the Data Link and Network layers and can replace separate bridges and routers.   annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 11. NETWORK LAYER

Computer Networks Unit 3 11. NETWORK LAYER SERVICES The network layer in the TCPIP protocol suite is responsible for the hostto host delivery of datagrams. It provides services to the transport layer and receives services from the data link layer. The network layer translates the logical addresses into physical addresses It determines the route from the source to the destination and also manages the traffic problems such as switching, routing and controls the congestion of data packets. The

and controls the congestion of data packets. The main role of the network layer is to move the packets from sending host to the receiving host. Services provided by network layer are PACKETIZING The first duty of the network layer is definitely packetizing. This means encapsulating the payload (data received from upper layer) in a networklayer packet at the source and decapsulating the payload from the networklayer packet at the destination. The network layer is responsible for delivery of

The network layer is responsible for delivery of packets from a sender to a receiver without changing or using the contents. ROUTING AND FORWARDING Routing The network layer is responsible for routing the packet from its source to the destination. The network layer is responsible for finding the best one among these possible routes. The network layer needs to have some specific strategies for defining the best route. Routing is the concept of applying strategies and running routing protocols to

strategies and running routing protocols to create the decisionmaking tables for each router. These tables are called as routing tables.UNIT III  NETWORK LAYER Network Layer Services  Packet Switching  Performance  IPV4 Addresses  Forwarding of IP Packets  Network Layer Protocols: IP, ICMP v4  Unicast Routing Algorithms  Protocols  Multicasting Basics  IPV6 Addressing  IPV6 Protocol annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 2Forwarding Forwarding can be defined as the action

Forwarding can be defined as the action applied by each router when a packet arrives at one of its interfaces. The decisionmaking table, a router normally uses for applying this action is called the forwarding table. When a router receives a packet from one of its attached networks, it needs to forward the packet to another attached network. ERROR CONTROL The network layer in the Internet does not directly provide error control. It adds a checksum field to the datagram to control any corruption

field to the datagram to control any corruption in the header, but not in the whole datagram. This checksum prevents any changes or corruptions in the header of the datagram. The Internet uses an auxiliary protocol called ICMP, that provides some kind of error control if the datagram is discarded or has some unknown information in the header. FLOW CONTROL Flow control regulates the amount of data a source can send without overwhelming the receiver. The network layer in the Internet, however,

The network layer in the Internet, however, does not directly provide any flow control. The datagrams are sent by the sender when they are ready, without any attention to the readiness of the receiver. Flow control is provided for most of the upperlayer protocols that use the services of the network layer, so another level of flow control makes the network layer more complicated and the whole system less efficient. CONGESTION CONTROL Another issue in a networklayer protocol is congestion

issue in a networklayer protocol is congestion control. Congestion in the network layer is a situation in which too many datagrams are present in an area of the Internet. Congestion may occur if the number of datagrams sent by source computers is beyond the capacity of the network or routers. In this situation, some routers may drop some of the datagrams. SECURITY Another issue related to communication at the network layer is security. To provide security for a connectionless network layer, we

security for a connectionless network layer, we need to have another virtual level that changes the connectionless service to a connection oriented service. This virtual layer is called as called IPSec (IP Security). 2. PACKET SWITCHING ( REFER THE TOPIC PACKET SWITCHING FROM UNIT  I ) annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 33. NETWORKLAYER PERFORMANCE The performance of a network can be measured in terms of Delay, Throughput and Packet loss. Congestion control is an

and Packet loss. Congestion control is an issue that can improve the performance. DELAY A packet from its source to its destination, encounters delays. The delays in a network can be divided into four types: Transmission delay, Propagation delay, Processing delay and Queuing delay. Transmission Delay A source host or a router cannot send a packet instantaneously. A sender needs to put the bits in a packet on the line one by one. If the first bit of the packet is put on the line at time t 1 and

of the packet is put on the line at time t 1 and the last bit is put on the line at time t 2, transmission delay of the packet is (t 2  t1). The transmission delay is longer for a longer packet and shorter if the sender can transmit faster. The Transmission delay is calculated using the formula Delay tr  (Packet length)  (Transmission rate) Example : In a Fast Ethernet LAN with the transmission rate of 100 million bits per second and a packet of 10,000 bits, it takes (10,000)(100,000,000) or 100

10,000 bits, it takes (10,000)(100,000,000) or 100 microseconds for all bits of the packet to be put on the line. Propagation Delay Propagation delay is the time it takes for a bit to travel from point A to point B in the transmission media. The propagation delay for a packetswitched network depends on the propagation delay of each network (LAN or WAN). The propagation delay depends on the propagation speed of the media, which is 3X108 meterssecond in a vacuum and normally much less in a wired

in a vacuum and normally much less in a wired medium. It also depends on the distance of the link. The Propagation delay is calculated using the formula Delay pg  (Distance)  (Propagation speed) Example If the distance of a cable link in a pointtopoint WAN is 2000 meters and the propagation speed of the bits in the cable is 2 X108 meterssecond, then the propagation delay is 10 microseconds. Processing Delay The processing delay is the time required for a router or a destination host to receive a

for a router or a destination host to receive a packet from its input port, remove the header, perform an error detection procedure, and deliver the packet to the output port (in the case of a annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 4router) or deliver the packet to the upperlayer protocol (in the case of the destination host). The processing delay may be different for each packet, but normally is calculated as an average. Delay pr  Time required to process a packet in a

Delay pr  Time required to process a packet in a router or a destination host Queuing Delay Queuing delay can normally happen in a router. A router has an input queue connected to each of its input ports to store packets waiting to be processed. The router also has an output queue connected to each of its output ports to store packets waiting to be transmitted. The queuing delay for a packet in a router is measured as the time a packet waits in the input queue and output queue of a router. Delay

input queue and output queue of a router. Delay qu  The time a packet waits in input and output queues in a router Total Delay Assuming equal delays for the sender, routers and receiver, the total delay (sourcetodestination delay) of a packet can be calculated if we know the number of routers, n, in the whole path. Total delay  (n  1) (Delay tr  Delay pg  Delay pr)  (n) (Delay qu) If we have n routers, we have (n 1) links. Therefore, we have (n 1) transmission delays related to n routers and the

transmission delays related to n routers and the source, (n 1) propagation delays related to (n 1) links, (n 1) processing delays related to n routers and the destination, and only n queuing delays related to n routers. THROUGHPUT Throughput at any point in a network is defined as the number of bits passing through the point in a second, which is actually the transmission rate of data at that point. In a path from source to destination, a packet may pass through several links (networks), each

may pass through several links (networks), each with a different transmission rate. Throughput is calculated using the formula Throughput  minimumTR 1 , TR 2, . . . TR n Example: Let us assume that we have three links, each with a different transmission rate. The data can flow at the rate of 200 kbps in Link1, 100 kbps in Link2 and 150kbps in Link3. Throughput  minimum200,100,150  100. PACKET LOSS Another issue that severely affects the performance of communication is the number of packets lost

of communication is the number of packets lost during transmission. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 5When a router receives a packet while processing another packet, the received packet needs to be stored in the input buffer waiting for its turn. A router has an input buffer with a limited size. A time may come when the buffer is full and the next packet needs to be dropped. The effect of packet loss on the Internet network layer is that the packet needs to be

network layer is that the packet needs to be resent, which in turn may create overflow and cause more packet loss. CONGESTION CONTROL Congestion at the network layer is related to two issues, throughput and delay. Based on Delay When the load is much less than the capacity of the network, the delay is at a minimum. This minimum delay is composed of propagation delay and processing delay, both of which are negligible. However, when the load reaches the network capacity, the delay increases

reaches the network capacity, the delay increases sharply because we now need to add the queuing delay to the total delay. The delay becomes infinite when the load is greater than the capacity. Based on Throughout When the load is below the capacity of the network, the throughput increases proportionally with the load. We expect the throughput to remain constant after the load reaches the capacity, but instead the throughput declines sharply. The reason is the discarding of packets by the

The reason is the discarding of packets by the routers. When the load exceeds the capacity, the queues become full and the routers have to discard some packets. Discarding packets does not reduce the number of packets in the network because the sources retransmit the packets, using timeout mechanisms, when the packets do not reach the destinations. Congestion Control Mechanisms Congestion control is a mechanism for improving performance. It refers to techniques and mechanisms that can either

to techniques and mechanisms that can either prevent congestion before it happens or remove congestion after it has happened. In general, we can divide congestion control mechanisms into two broad categories: annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 6Openloop Congestion control (prevention) Closedloop Congestion control (removal) OPENLOOP CONGESTION CONTROL In openloop congestion control, policies are applied to prevent congestion before it happens. In these mechanisms,

congestion before it happens. In these mechanisms, congestion control is handled by either the source or the destination. Retransmission Policy Retransmission is sometimes unavoidable. If the sender feels that a sent packet is lost or corrupted, the packet needs to be retransmitted. Retransmission in general may increase congestion in the network. However, a good retransmission policy can prevent congestion. The retransmission policy and the retransmission timers must be designed to optimize

retransmission timers must be designed to optimize efficiency and at the same time prevent congestion. Window Policy The type of window at the sender may also affect congestion. The Selective Repeat window is better than the GoBackN window for congestion control. In the GoBackN window, when the timer for a packet times out, several packets may be resent, although some may have arrived safe and sound at the receiver. This duplication may make the congestion worse. The Selective Repeat window, on

congestion worse. The Selective Repeat window, on the other hand, tries to send the specific packets that have been lost or corrupted. Acknowledgment Policy The acknowledgment policy imposed by the receiver may also affect congestion. If the receiver does not acknowledge every packet it receives, it may slow down the sender and help prevent congestion. Several approaches are used in this case. A receiver may send an acknowledgment only if it has a packet to be sent or a special timer expires.

a packet to be sent or a special timer expires. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 7A receiver may decide to acknowledge only N packets at a time. Sending fewer acknowledgments means imposing less load on the network. Discarding Policy A good discarding policy by the routers may prevent congestion and at the same time may not harm the integrity of the transmission. For example, in audio transmission, if the policy is to discard less sensitive packets when congestion

to discard less sensitive packets when congestion is likely to happen, the quality of sound is still preserved and congestion is prevented or alleviated. Admission Policy An admission policy, which is a qualityofservice mechanism can also prevent congestion in virtualcircuit networks. Switches in a flow first check the resource requirement of a flow before admitting it to the network. A router can deny establishing a virtualcircuit connection if there is congestion in the network or if there is

there is congestion in the network or if there is a possibility of future congestion. CLOSEDLOOP CONGESTION CONTROL Closedloop congestion control mechanisms try to alleviate congestion after it happens. Several mechanisms have been used by different protocols. Backpressure The technique of backpressure refers to a congestion control mechanism in which a congested node stops receiving data from the immediate upstream node or nodes. This may cause the upstream node or nodes to become congested,

the upstream node or nodes to become congested, and they, in turn, reject data from their upstream node or nodes, and so on. Backpressure is a nodeto node congestion control that starts with a node and propagates, in the opposite direction of data flow, to the source. The backpressure technique can be applied only to virtual circuit networks, in which each node knows the upstream node from which a flow of data is coming. Choke Packet A choke packet is a packet sent by a node to the source to

packet is a packet sent by a node to the source to inform it of congestion. In backpressure, the warning is from one node to its upstream node, although the warning may eventually reach the source station. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 8In the chokepacket method, the warning is from the router, which has encountered congestion, directly to the source station. The intermediate nodes through which the packet has traveled are not warned. The warning message goes

traveled are not warned. The warning message goes directly to the source station; the intermediate routers do not take any action. Implicit Signaling In implicit signaling, there is no communication between the congested node or nodes and the source. The source guesses that there is congestion somewhere in the network from other symptoms. For example, when a source sends several packets and there is no acknowledgment for a while, one assumption is that the network is congested. The delay in

is that the network is congested. The delay in receiving an acknowledgment is interpreted as congestion in the network; the source should slow down. Explicit Signaling The node that experiences congestion can explicitly send a signal to the source or destination. The explicitsignaling method is different from the chokepacket method. In the chokepacket method, a separate packet is used for this purpose; in the explicitsignaling method, the signal is included in the packets that carry data.

signal is included in the packets that carry data. Explicit signaling can occur in either the forward or the backward direction. 4. IPV4 ADDRESSES The identifier used in the IP layer of the TCPIP protocol suite to identify the connection of each device to the Internet is called the Internet address or IP address. Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) is the fourth version in the development of the Internet Protocol (IP) and the first version of the protocol to be widely deployed. IPv4 is described

protocol to be widely deployed. IPv4 is described in IETF publication in September 1981. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 9The IP address is the address of the connection, not the host or the router. An IPv4 address is a 32bit address that uniquely and universally defines the connection . If the device is moved to another network, the IP address may be changed. IPv4 addresses are unique in the sense that each address defines one, and only one, connection to the

defines one, and only one, connection to the Internet. If a device has two connections to the Internet, via two networks, it has two IPv4 addresses. Pv4 addresses are universal in the sense that the addressing system must be accepted by any host that wants to be connected to the Internet. IPV4 ADDRESS SPACE IPv4 defines addresses has an address space. An address space is the total number of addresses used by the protocol. If a protocol uses b bits to define an address, the address space is 2b

bits to define an address, the address space is 2b because each bit can have two different values (0 or 1). IPv4 uses 32bit addresses, which means that the address space is 232 or 4,294,967,296 (more than four billion). 4 billion devices could be connected to the Internet. IPV4 ADDRESS NOTATION There are three common notations to show an IPv4 address: (i) binary notation (base 2), (ii) dotteddecimal notation (base 256), and (ii) hexadecimal notation (base 16). In binary notation, an IPv4 address

(base 16). In binary notation, an IPv4 address is displayed as 32 bits. To make the address more readable, one or more spaces are usually inserted between bytes (8 bits). In dotteddecimal notation,IPv4 addresses are usually written in decimal form with a decimal point (dot) separating the bytes. Each number in the dotteddecimal notation is between 0 and 255. In hexadecimal notation, each hexadecimal digit is equivalent to four bits. This means that a 32bit address has 8 hexadecimal digits. This

a 32bit address has 8 hexadecimal digits. This notation is often used in network programming. HIERARCHY IN IPV4 ADDRESSING In any communication network that involves delivery, the addressing system is hierarchical. A 32bit IPv4 address is also hierarchical, but divided only into two parts. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 10The first part of the address, called the prefix, defines the network(Net ID); the second part of the address, called the suffix, defines the

of the address, called the suffix, defines the node (Host ID). The prefix length is n bits and the suffix length is (32n) bits. A prefix can be fixed length or variable length. The network identifier in the IPv4 was first designed as a fixedlength prefix. This scheme is referred to as classful addressing. The new scheme, which is referred to as classless addressing, uses a variable length network prefix. CATEGORIES OF IPV4 ADDRESSING There are two broad categories of IPv4 Addressing techniques.

broad categories of IPv4 Addressing techniques. They are Classful Addressing Classless Addressing CLASSFUL ADDRESSING An IPv4 address is 32bit long(4 bytes). An IPv4 address is divided into subclasses: annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 11Classful Network Architecture Class A In Class A, an IP address is assigned to those networks that contain a large number of hosts. The network ID is 8 bits long. The host ID is 24 bits long. In Class A, the first bit in higher order

long. In Class A, the first bit in higher order bits of the first octet is always set to 0 and the remaining 7 bits determine the network ID. The 24 bits determine the host ID in any network. The total number of networks in Class A  27  128 network address The total number of hosts in Class A  224  2  16,777,214 host address annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 12Class B In Class B, an IP address is assigned to those networks that range from small sized to largesized

networks that range from small sized to largesized networks. The Network ID is 16 bits long. The Host ID is 16 bits long. In Class B, the higher order bits of the first octet is always set to 10, and the remaining14 bits determine the network ID. The other 16 bits determine the Host ID. The total number of networks in Class B  214  16384 network address The total number of hosts in Class B  216  2  65534 host address Class C In Class C, an IP address is assigned to only smallsized networks. The

is assigned to only smallsized networks. The Network ID is 24 bits long. The host ID is 8 bits long. In Class C, the higher order bits of the first octet is always set to 110, and the remaining 21 bits determine the network ID. The 8 bits of the host ID determine the host in a network. The total number of networks  221  2097152 network address The total number of hosts  28  2  254 host address Class D In Class D, an IP address is reserved for multicast addresses. It does not possess subnetting.

addresses. It does not possess subnetting. The higher order bits of the first octet is always set to 1110, and the remaining bits determines the host ID in any network. Class E In Class E, an IP address is used for the future use or for the research and development purposes. It does not possess any subnetting. The higher order bits of the first octet is always set to 1111, and the remaining bits determines the host ID in any network. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3

Computer Networks Unit 3 13Address Depletion in Classful Addressing The reason that classful addressing has become obsolete is address depletion. Since the addresses were not distributed properly, the Internet was faced with the problem of the addresses being rapidly used up. This results in no more addresses available for organizations and individuals that needed to be connected to the Internet. To understand the problem, let us think about class A. This class can be assigned to only 128

class A. This class can be assigned to only 128 organizations in the world, but each organization needs to have a single network with 16,777,216 nodes . Since there may be only a few organizations that are this large, most of the addresses in this class were wasted (unused). Class B addresses were designed for midsize organizations, but many of the addresses in this class also remained unused. Class C addresses have a completely different flaw in design. The number of addresses that can be used

design. The number of addresses that can be used in each network (256) was so small that most companies were not comfortable using a block in this address class. Class E addresses were almost never used, wasting the whole class. Advantage of Classful Addressing Although classful addressing had several problems and became obsolete, it had one advantage. Given an address, we can easily find the class of the address and, since the prefix length for each class is fixed, we can find the prefix length

each class is fixed, we can find the prefix length immediately. In other words, the prefix length in classful addressing is inherent in the address; no extra information is needed to extract the prefix and the suffix. Subnetting and Supernetting To alleviate address depletion, two strategies were proposed and implemented: (i) Subnetting and (ii) Supernetting. Subnetting In subnetting, a class A or class B block is divided into several subnets. Each subnet has a larger prefix length than the

Each subnet has a larger prefix length than the original network. For example, if a network in class A is divided into four subnets, each subnet has a prefix of n sub  10. At the same time, if all of the addresses in a network are not used, subnetting allows the addresses to be divided among several organizations. CLASSLESS ADDRESSING In 1996, the Internet authorities announced a new architecture called classless addressing. In classless addressing, variablelength blocks are used that belong to

variablelength blocks are used that belong to no classes. We can have a block of 1 address, 2 addresses, 4 addresses, 128 addresses, and so on. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 14In classless addressing, the whole address space is divided into variable length blocks. The prefix in an address defines the block (network); the suffix defines the node (device). Theoretically, we can have a block of 20, 21, 22, 232 addresses. The number of addresses in a block needs to

The number of addresses in a block needs to be a power of 2. An organization can be granted one block of addresses. The prefix length in classless addressing is variable. We can have a prefix length that ranges from 0 to 32. The size of the network is inversely proportional to the length of the prefix. A small prefix means a larger network; a large prefix means a smaller network. The idea of classless addressing can be easily applied to classful addressing. An address in class A can be thought

addressing. An address in class A can be thought of as a classless address in which the prefix length is 8. An address in class B can be thought of as a classless address in which the prefix is 16, and so on. In other words, classful addressing is a special case of classless addressing. Notation used in Classless Addressing The notation used in classless addressing is informally referred to as slash notation and formally as classless interdomain routing or CIDR. For example , 192.168.100.14 24

routing or CIDR. For example , 192.168.100.14 24 represents the IP address 192.168.100.14 and, its subnet mask 255.255.255.0, which has 24 leading 1bits. Address Aggregation One of the advantages of the CIDR strategy is address aggregation (sometimes called address summarization or route summarization). When blocks of addresses are combined to create a larger block, routing can be done based on the prefix of the larger block. ICANN assigns a large block of addresses to an ISP. Each ISP in turn

block of addresses to an ISP. Each ISP in turn divides its assigned block into smaller subblocks and grants the subblocks to its customers. Special Addresses in IPv4 There are five special addresses that are used for special purposes: thishost address, limitedbroadcastaddress, loopback address, private addresses, and multicast addresses. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 15Thishost Address The only address in the block 0.0.0.032 is called the thishost address. It is

0.0.0.032 is called the thishost address. It is used whenever a host needs to send an IP datagram but it does not know its own address to use as the source address. Limitedbroadcast Address The only address in the block 255.255.255.25532 is called the limited broadcast address. It is used whenever a router or a host needs to send a datagram to all devices in a network. The routers in the network, however, block the packet having this address as the destination;the packet cannot travel outside

the destination;the packet cannot travel outside the network. Loopback Address The block 127.0.0.08 is called the loopback address. A packet with one of the addresses in this block as the destination address never leaves the host; it will remain in the host. Private Addresses Four blocks are assigned as private addresses: 10.0.0.08, 172.16.0.012, 192.168.0.016, and 169.254.0.016. Multicast Addresses The block 224.0.0.04 is reserved for multicast addresses.  5. DHCP  DYNAMIC HOST CONFIGURATION

addresses.  5. DHCP  DYNAMIC HOST CONFIGURATION PROTOCOL The dynamic host configuration protocol is used to simplify the installation and maintenance of networked computers. DHCP is derived from an earlier protocol called BOOTP. Ethernet addresses are configured into network by manufacturer and they are unique. IP addresses must be unique on a given internetwork but also must reflect the structure of the internetwork Most host Operating Systems provide a way to manually configure the IP

Systems provide a way to manually configure the IP information for the host Drawbacks of manual configuration : 1. A lot of work to configure all the hosts in a large network 2. Configuration process is errorprune It is necessary to ensure that every host gets the correct network number and that no two hosts receive the same IP address. For these reasons, automated configuration methods are required. The primary method uses a protocol known as the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). The

Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). The main goal of DHCP is to minimize the amount of manual configuration required for a host. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 16If a new computer is connected to a network, DHCP can provide it with all the necessary information for full system integration into the network. DHCP is based on a clientserver model. DHCP clients send a request to a DHCP server to which the server responds with an IP address DHCP server is

server responds with an IP address DHCP server is responsible for providing configuration information to hosts. There is at least one DHCP server for an administrative domain. The DHCP server can function just as a centralized repository for host configuration information. The DHCP server maintains a pool of available addresses that it hands out to hosts on demand. A newly booted or attached host sends a DHCPDISCOVER message to a special IP address (255.255.255.255., which is an IP broadcast

(255.255.255.255., which is an IP broadcast address. This means it will be received by all hosts and routers on that network. DHCP uses the concept of a relay agent. There is at least one relay agent on each network. DHCP relay agent is configured with the IP address of the DHCP server. When a relay agent receives a DHCPDISCOVER message, it unicasts it to the DHCP server and awaits the response, which it will then send back to the requesting client. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer

annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 17DHCP Message Format A DHCP packet is actually sent using a protocol called the User Datagram Protocol (UDP). 6. NETWORK ADDRESS TRANSLATION (NAT) A technology that can provide the mapping between the private and universal (external)addresses, and at the same time support virtual private networks is called as Network Address Translation (NAT). The technology allows a site to use a set of private addresses for internal communication

of private addresses for internal communication and a set of global Internet addresses (at least one) for communication with the rest of the world. The site must have only one connection to the global Internet through a NAT capable router that runs NAT software. The private network uses private addresses. The router that connects the network to the global address uses one private address and one global address. The private network is invisible to the rest of the Internet; the rest of the

to the rest of the Internet; the rest of the Internet sees only the NAT router with the address 200.24.5.8. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 18Types of NAT Two types of NAT exists . (a) Onetoone translation of IP addresses (b) Onetomany translation of IP addresses Address Translation All of the outgoing packets go through the NAT router, which replaces the source address in the packet with the global NAT address. All incoming packets also pass through the NAT

All incoming packets also pass through the NAT router, which replaces the destination address in the packet (the NAT router global address) with the appropriate private address. Translation Table There may be tens or hundreds of private IP addresses, each belonging to one specific host. The problem arises when we want to translate the source address to an external address. This is solved if the NAT router has a translation table. Translation table with two columns A translation table has only

with two columns A translation table has only two columns: the private address and the external address (destination address of the packet). When the router translates the source address of the outgoing packet, it also makes note of the destination addresswhere the packet is going. When the response comes back from the destination, the router uses the source address of the packet (as the external address) to find the private address of the packet. Translation table with five columns To allow a

Translation table with five columns To allow a manytomany relationship between privatenetwork hosts and external server programs, we need more information in the translation table. If the translation table has five columns, instead of two, that include the source and destination port addresses and the transportlayer protocol, the ambiguity is eliminated. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 197. FORWARDING OF IP PACKETS Forwarding means to deliver the packet to the next

Forwarding means to deliver the packet to the next hop (which can be the final destination or the intermediate connecting device). Although IP protocol was originally designed as a connectionless protocol, today the tendency is to use IP as a connectionoriented protocol based on the label attached to an IP datagram . When IP is used as a connectionless protocol, forwarding is based on the destination address of the IP datagram. When the IP is used as a connectionoriented protocol, forwarding is

as a connectionoriented protocol, forwarding is based on the label attached to an IP datagram. FORWARDING BASED ON DESTINATION ADDRESS This is a traditional approach. In this case, forwarding requires a host or a router to have a forwarding table. When a host has a packet to send or when a router has received a packet to be forwarded, it looks at this table to find the next hop to deliver the packet to. The main points in forwarding of IP Packets(datagram) are the following: Every IP Packets

are the following: Every IP Packets contains the IP address of the destination host. The network part of an IP address uniquely identifies a single physical network that is part of the larger Internet. All hosts and routers that share the same network part of their address are connected to the same physical network and can thus communicate with each other by sending frames over that network. Every physical network that is part of the Internet has at least one router that, by definition, is also

at least one router that, by definition, is also connected to at least one other physical network; this router can exchange packets with hosts or routers on either network. Forwarding IP Packets can therefore be handled in the following way. A Packets is sent from a source host to a destination host, possibly passing through several routers along the way. Any node, whether it is a host or a router, first tries to establish whether it is connected to the same physical network as the destination.

to the same physical network as the destination. To do this, it compares the network part of the destination address with the network part of the address of each of its network interfaces. (Hosts normally have only one interface, while routers normally have two or more, since they are typically connected to two or more networks.) If a match occurs, then that means that the destination lies on the same physical network as the interface, and the packet can be directly delivered over that network

packet can be directly delivered over that network that has a reasonable chance of getting the packet closer to its destination. If there is no match, then the node is not connected to the same physical network as the destination node, then it needs to send the packet to a router. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 20In general, each node will have a choice of several routers, and so it needs to pick the best one, or at least one that has a reasonable chance of

or at least one that has a reasonable chance of getting the datagram closer to its destination. The router that it chooses is known as the next hop router. The router finds the correct next hop by consulting its forwarding table. The forwarding table is conceptually just a list of (NetworkNum, NextHop) pairs. There is also a default router that is used if none of the entries in the table matches the destinations network number. All Packets destined for hosts not on the physical network to which

for hosts not on the physical network to which the sending host is attached will be sent out through the default router. Forwarding Algorithm Simplified Forwarding Module The job of the forwarding module is to search the table, row by row. In each row, the n leftmost bits of the destination address (prefix) are kept and the rest of the bits (suffix) are set to 0s. If the resulting address ( network address), matches with the address in the first column, the information in the next two columns is

column, the information in the next two columns is extracted; otherwise the search continues. Normally, the last row has a default value in the first column, which indicates all destination addresses that did not match the previous rows. Routing in classless addressing uses another principle, longest mask matching. This principle states that the forwarding table is sorted from the longest mask to the shortest mask. In other words, if there are three masks, 27, 26, and 24, the mask 27 must be the

masks, 27, 26, and 24, the mask 27 must be the first entry and 24 must be the last. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 21Example Let us make a forwarding table for router R1 using the configuration as given in the figure above When a packet arrives whose leftmost 26 bits in the destination address match the bits in the first row, the packet is sent out from interface m2. When a packet arrives whose leftmost 25 bits in the address match the bits in the second row, the

the address match the bits in the second row, the packet is sent out from interface m0, and so on. The table clearly shows that the first row has the longest prefix and the fourth row has the shortest prefix. The longer prefix means a smaller range of addresses; the shorter prefix means a larger range of addresses. FORWARDING BASED ON LABEL In a connectionoriented network (virtualcircuit approach), a switch forwards a packet based on the label attached to the packet. Routing is normally based on

to the packet. Routing is normally based on searching the contents of a table; switching can be done by accessing a table using an index. In other words, routing involves searching; switching involves accessing. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 22Example The Figure below shows a simple example of using a label to access a switching table. Since the labels are used as the index to the table, finding the information in the table is immediate. MultiProtocol Label

in the table is immediate. MultiProtocol Label Switching (MPLS) During the 1980s, several vendors created routers that implement switching technology. Later IETF approved a standard that is called MultiProtocol Label Switching. In this standard, some conventional routers in the Internet can be replaced by MPLS routers, which can behave like a router and a switch. When behaving like a router, MPLS can forward the packet based on the destination address; when behaving like a switch, it can forward

when behaving like a switch, it can forward a packet based on the label. 8. NETWORK LAYER PROTOCOLS : IP, ICMPV4 The main protocol Internet Protocol is responsible for packetizing, forwarding, and delivery of a packet at the network layer. The Internet Control Message Protocol version 4 (ICMPv4) helps IPv4 to handle some errors that may occur in the networklayer delivery. IP  INTERNET PROTOCOL The Internet Protocol is the key tool used today to build scalable, heterogeneous internetworks. IP

to build scalable, heterogeneous internetworks. IP runs on all the nodes (both hosts and routers) in a collection of networks annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 23IP defines the infrastructure that allows these nodes and networks to function as a single logical internetwork. IP SERVICE MODEL Service Model defines the hosttohost services that we want to provide The main concern in defining a service model for an internetwork is that we can provide a hosttohost service

is that we can provide a hosttohost service only if this service can somehow be provided over each of the underlying physical networks. The Internet Protocol is the key tool used today to build scalable, heterogeneous internetworks. The IP service model can be thought of as having two parts: A GLOBAL ADDRESSING SCHEME  which provides a way to identify all hosts in the internetwork A DATAGRAM DELIVERY MODEL  A connectionless model of data delivery. IP PACKET FORMAT  IP DATAGRAM FORMAT A key part

IP PACKET FORMAT  IP DATAGRAM FORMAT A key part of the IP service model is the type of packets that can be carried. The IP datagram consists of a header followed by a number of bytes of data. FIELD DESCRIPTION Version Specifies the version of IP. Two versions exists  IPv4 and IPv6. HLen Specifies the length of the header TOS (Type of Service)An indication of the parameters of the quality of service desired such as Precedence, Delay, Throughput and Reliability. Length Length of the entire

and Reliability. Length Length of the entire datagram, including the header. The maximum size of an IP datagram is 65,535(210 )bytes Ident (Identification)Uniquely identifies the packet sequence number. Used for fragmentation and reassembly. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 24Flags Used to control whether routers are allowed to fragment a packet. If a packet is fragmented , this flag value is 1.If not, flag value is 0. Offset (Fragmentation offset) Indicates where

0. Offset (Fragmentation offset) Indicates where in the datagram, this fragment belongs. The fragment offset is measured in units of 8 octets (64 bits). The first fragment has offset zero. TTL (Time to Live)Indicates the maximum time the datagram is allowed to remain in the network. If this field contains the value zero, then the datagram must be destroyed. Protocol Indicates the next level protocol used in the data portion of the datagram Checksum Used to detect the processing errors introduced

Used to detect the processing errors introduced into the packet Source Address The IP address of the original sender of the packet. Destination AddressThe IP address of the final destination of the packet. Options This is optional field. These options may contain values for options such as Security, Record Route, Time Stamp, etc Pad Used to ensure that the internet header ends on a 32 bit boundary. The padding is zero. IP DATAGRAM  FRAGMENTATION AND REASSEMBLY Fragmentation : Every network type

AND REASSEMBLY Fragmentation : Every network type has a maximum transmission unit (MTU), which is the largest IP datagram that it can carry in a frame. Fragmentation of a datagram will only be necessary if the path to the destination includes a network with a smaller MTU. When a host sends an IP datagram,it can choose any size that it wants. Fragmentation typically occurs in a router when it receives a datagram that it wants to forward over a network that has an MTU that is smaller than the

a network that has an MTU that is smaller than the received datagram. Each fragment is itself a selfcontained IP datagram that is transmitted over a sequence of physical networks, independent of the other fragments. Each IP datagram is reencapsulated for each physical network over which it travels. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 25For example , if we consider an Ethernet network to accept packets up to 1500 bytes long. This leaves two choices for the IP service

long. This leaves two choices for the IP service model: Make sure that all IP datagrams are small enough to fit inside one packet on any network technology Provide a means by which packets can be fragmented and reassembled when they are too big to go over a given network technology. Fragmentation produces smaller, valid IP datagrams that can be readily reassembled into the original datagram upon receipt, independent of the order of their arrival. Example: The original packet starts at the

Example: The original packet starts at the client; the fragments are reassembled at the server. The value of the identification field is the same in all fragments, as is the value of the flags field with the more bit set for all fragments except the last. Also, the value of the offset field for each fragment is shown. Although the fragments arrived out of order at the destination, they can be correctly reassembled. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 26The value of the

Computer Networks Unit 3 26The value of the offset field is always relative to the original datagram. Even if each fragment follows a different path and arrives out of order, the final destination host can reassemble the original datagram from the fragments received (if none of them is lost) using the following strategy: 1) The first fragment has an offset field value of zero. 2) Divide the length of the first fragment by 8. The second fragment has an offset value equal to that result. 3)

has an offset value equal to that result. 3) Divide the total length of the first and second fragment by 8. The third fragment has an offset value equal to that result. 4) Continue the process. The last fragment has its M bit set to 0. 5) Continue the process. The last fragment has a more bit value of 0. Reassembly: Reassembly is done at the receiving host and not at each router. To enable these fragments to be reassembled at the receiving host, they all carry the same identifier in the Ident

they all carry the same identifier in the Ident field. This identifier is chosen by the sending host and is intended to be unique among all the datagrams that might arrive at the destination from this source over some reasonable time period. Since all fragments of the original datagram contain this identifier, the reassembling host will be able to recognize those fragments that go together. For example, if a single fragment is lost, the receiver will still attempt to reassemble the datagram, and

will still attempt to reassemble the datagram, and it will eventually give up and have to garbage collect the resources that were used to perform the failed reassembly. Hosts are now strongly encouraged to perform path MTU discovery, a process by which fragmentation is avoided by sending packets that are small enough to traverse the link with the smallest MTU in the path from sender to receiver. IP SECURITY There are three security issues that are particularly applicable to the IP protocol: (1)

particularly applicable to the IP protocol: (1) Packet Sniffing (2) Packet Modification and (3) IP Spoofing. Packet Sniffing An intruder may intercept an IP packet and make a copy of it. Packet sniffing is a passive attack, in which the attacker does not change the contents of the packet. This type of attack is very difficult to detect because the sender and the receiver may never know that the packet has been copied. Although packet sniffing cannot be stopped, encryption of the packet can make

be stopped, encryption of the packet can make the attackers effort useless. The attacker may still sniff the packet, but the content is not detectable. Packet Modification The second type of attack is to modify the packet. The attacker intercepts the packet,changes its contents, and sends the new packet to the receiver. The receiver believes that the packet is coming from the original sender. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 27This type of attack can be detected

Unit 3 27This type of attack can be detected using a data integrity mechanism. The receiver, before opening and using the contents of the message, can use this mechanism to make sure that the packet has not been changed during the transmission. IP Spoofing An attacker can masquerade as somebody else and create an IP packet that carries the source address of another computer. An attacker can send an IP packet to a bank pretending that it is coming from one of the customers. This type of attack

from one of the customers. This type of attack can be prevented using an origin authentication mechanism IP Sec The IP packets today can be protected from the previously mentioned attacks using a protocol called IPSec (IP Security). This protocol is used in conjunction with the IP protocol. IPSec protocol creates a connectionoriented service between two entities in which they can exchange IP packets without worrying about the three attacks such as Packet Sniffing, Packet Modification and IP

as Packet Sniffing, Packet Modification and IP Spoofing. IP Sec provides the following four services: 1) Defining Algorithms and Keys : The two entities that want to create a secure channel between themselves can agree on some available algorithms and keys to be used for security purposes. 2) Packet Encryption : The packets exchanged between two parties can be encrypted for privacy using one of the encryption algorithms and a shared key agreed upon in the first step. This makes the packet

upon in the first step. This makes the packet sniffing attack useless. 3) Data Integrity : Data integrity guarantees that the packet is not modified during the transmission. If the received packet does not pass the data integrity test, it is discarded.This prevents the second attack, packet modification. 4)Origin Authentication : IPSec can authenticate the origin of the packet to be sure that the packet is not created by an imposter. This can prevent IP spoofing attacks. ICMPV4  INTERNET CONTROL

IP spoofing attacks. ICMPV4  INTERNET CONTROL MESSAGE PROTOCOL VERSION 4 ICMP is a networklayer protocol. It is a companion to the IP protocol. Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) defines a collection of error messages that are sent back to the source host whenever a router or host is unable to process an IP datagram successfully. ICMP MESSAGE TYPES ICMP messages are divided into two broad categories: errorreporting messages and query messages. The errorreporting messages report problems

The errorreporting messages report problems that a router or a host (destination) may encounter when it processes an IP packet. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 28The query messages help a host or a network manager get specific information from a router or another host. ICMP Error  Reporting Messages Destination UnreachableWhen a router cannot route a datagram, the datagram is discarded and sends a destination unreachable message to source host. Source QuenchWhen a

message to source host. Source QuenchWhen a router or host discards a datagram due to congestion, it sends a sourcequench message to the source host. This message acts as flow control. Time ExceededRouter discards a datagram when TTL field becomes 0 and a time exceeded message is sent to the source host. Parameter ProblemIf a router discovers ambiguous or missing value in any field of the datagram, it discards the datagram and sends parameter problem message to source. RedirectionRedirect

problem message to source. RedirectionRedirect messages are sent by the default router to inform the source host to update its forwarding table when the packet is routed on a wrong path. ICMP Query Messages annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 29 Echo Request  ReplyCombination of echo request and reply messages determines whether two systems communicate or not. Timestamp Request  ReplyTwo machines can use the timestamp request and reply messages to determine the

request and reply messages to determine the roundtrip time (RTT). Address Mask Request  ReplyA host to obtain its subnet mask, sends an address mask request message to the router, which responds with an address mask reply message. Router SolicitationAdvertisementA host broadcasts a router solicitation message to know about the router. Router broadcasts its routing information with router advertisement message. ICMP MESSAGE FORMAT An ICMP message has an 8byte header and a variablesize data

has an 8byte header and a variablesize data section. Type Defines the type of the message Code Specifies the reason for the particular message type Checksum Used for error detection Rest of the header Specific for each message type Data Used to carry information Identifier Used to match the request with the reply Sequence Number Sequence Number of the ICMP packet ICMP DEBUGGING TOOLS Two tools are used for debugging purpose. They are (1) Ping (2) Traceroute Ping The ping program is used to find

Traceroute Ping The ping program is used to find if a host is alive and responding. The source host sends ICMP echorequest messages; the destination, if alive, responds with ICMP echoreply messages. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 30The ping program sets the identifier field in the echorequest and echoreply message and starts the sequence number from 0; this number is incremented by 1 each time a new message is sent. The ping program can calculate the roundtrip

sent. The ping program can calculate the roundtrip time. It inserts the sending time in the data section of the message. When the packet arrives, it subtracts the arrival time from the departure time to get the roundtrip time (RTT).  ping google.com Traceroute or Tracert The traceroute program in UNIX or tracert in Windows can be used to trace the path of a packet from a source to the destination. It can find the IP addresses of all the routers that are visited along the path. The program is

that are visited along the path. The program is usually set to check for the maximum of 30 hops (routers) to be visited. The number of hops in the Internet is normally less than this.  traceroute google.com 9. UNICAST ROUTING Routing is the process of selecting best paths in a network. In unicast routing, a packet is routed, hop by hop, from its source to its destination by the help of forwarding tables. Routing a packet from its source to its destination means routing the packet from a source

destination means routing the packet from a source router (the default router of the source host) to a destination router (the router connected to the destination network). The source host needs no forwarding table because it delivers its packet to the default router in its local network. The destination host needs no forwarding table either because it receives the packet from its default router in its local network. Only the intermediate routers in the networks need forwarding tables. NETWORK

in the networks need forwarding tables. NETWORK AS A GRAPH The Figure below shows a graph representing a network. The nodes of the graph, labeled A through G, may be hosts, switches, routers, or networks. The edges of the graph correspond to the network links. Each edge has an associated cost. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 31 The basic problem of routing is to find the lowestcost path between any two nodes, where the cost of a path equals the sum of the costs of

the cost of a path equals the sum of the costs of all the edges that make up the path. This static approach has several problems: It does not deal with node or link failures. It does not consider the addition of new nodes or links. It implies that edge costs cannot change. For these reasons, routing is achieved by running routing protocols among the nodes. These protocols provide a distributed, dynamic way to solve the problem of finding the lowestcost path in the presence of link and node

lowestcost path in the presence of link and node failures and changing edge costs. UNICAST ROUTING ALGORITHMS There are three main classes of routing protocols: 1) Distance Vector Routing Algorithm  Routing Information Protocol 2) Link State Routing Algorithm  Open Shortest Path First Protocol 3) PathVector Routing Algorithm  Border Gateway Protocol DISTANCE VECTOR ROUTING (DSR) ROUTING INFORMATION PROTOCOL (RIP) BELLMAN  FORD ALGORITHM Distance vector routing is distributed, i.e., algorithm is

vector routing is distributed, i.e., algorithm is run on all nodes. Each node knows the distance (cost) to each of its directly connected neighbors. Nodes construct a vector (Destination, Cost, NextHop) and distributes to its neighbors. Nodes compute routing table of minimum distance to every other node via NextHop using information obtained from its neighbors. Initial State In given network, cost of each link is 1 hop. Each node sets a distance of 1 (hop) to its immediate neighbor and cost to

of 1 (hop) to its immediate neighbor and cost to itself as 0. Distance for nonneighbors is marked as unreachable with value  (infinity). For node A, nodes B, C, E and F are reachable, whereas nodes D and G are unreachable. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 32 The initial table for all the nodes are given below Each node sends its initial table (distance vector) to neighbors and receives their estimate. Node A sends its table to nodes B, C, E  F and receives tables

its table to nodes B, C, E  F and receives tables from nodes B, C, E  F. Each node updates its routing table by comparing with each of its neighbors table For each destination, Total Cost is computed as: Total Cost  Cost (Node to Neighbor)  Cost (Neighbor to Destination) If Total Cost  Cost then  Cost  Total Cost and NextHop  Neighbor Node A learns from Cs table to reach node D and from Fs table to reach node G. Total Cost to reach node D via C  Cost (A to C)  Cost(C to D) Cost  1  1  2. Since 2

Cost (A to C)  Cost(C to D) Cost  1  1  2. Since 2  , entry for destination D in As table is changed to (D, 2, C) Total Cost to reach node G via F  Cost(A to F)  Cost(F to G)  1  1  2 Since 2  , entry for destination G in As table is changed to (G, 2, F) Each node builds complete routing table after few exchanges amongst its neighbors. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 33 System stabilizes when all nodes have complete routing information, i.e., convergence. Routing

routing information, i.e., convergence. Routing tables are exchanged periodically or in case of triggered update. The final distances stored at each node is given below: Updation of Routing Tables There are two different circumstances under which a given node decides to send a routing update to its neighbors. Periodic Update In this case, each node automatically sends an update message every so often, even if nothing has changed. The frequency of these periodic updates varies from protocol to

of these periodic updates varies from protocol to protocol, but it is typically on the order of several seconds to several minutes. Triggered Update In this case, whenever a node notices a link failure or receives an update from one of its neighbors that causes it to change one of the routes in its routing table. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 34 Whenever a nodes routing table changes, it sends an update to its neighbors, which may lead to a change in their

its neighbors, which may lead to a change in their tables, causing them to send an update to their neighbors. ROUTING INFORMATION PROTOCOL (RIP) RIP is an intradomain routing protocol based on distancevector algorithm. Example Routers advertise the cost of reaching networks. Cost of reaching each link is 1 hop. For example, router C advertises to A that it can reach network 2, 3 at cost 0 (directly connected), networks 5, 6 at cost 1 and network 4 at cost 2. Each router updates cost and next hop

4 at cost 2. Each router updates cost and next hop for each network number. Infinity is defined as 16, i.e., any route cannot have more than 15 hops. Therefore RIP can be implemented on smallsized networks only. Advertisements are sent every 30 seconds or in case of triggered update. Command  It indicates the packet type. Value 1 represents a request packet. Value 2 represents a response packet. Version  It indicates the RIP version number. For RIPv1, the value is 0x01. Address Family Identifier

the value is 0x01. Address Family Identifier  When the value is 2, it represents the IP protocol. IP Address  It indicates the destination IP address of the route. It can be the addresses of only the natural network segment. Metric  It indicates the hop count of a route to its destination. CountToInfinity (or) Loop Instability Problem Suppose link from node A to E goes down. Node A advertises a distance of  to E to its neighbors Node B receives periodic update from C before As update reaches B

periodic update from C before As update reaches B Node B updated by C, concludes that E can be reached in 3 hops via C Node B advertises to A as 3 hops to reach E annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 35 Node A in turn updates C with a distance of 4 hops to E and so on Thus nodes update each other until cost to E reaches infinity, i.e., no convergence. Routing table does not stabilize. This problem is called loop instability or count to infinity Solution to

loop instability or count to infinity Solution to CountToInfinity (or) Loop Instability Problem : Infinity is redefined to a small number, say 16. Distance between any two nodes can be 15 hops maximum. Thus distance vector routing cannot be used in large networks. When a node updates its neighbors, it does not send those routes it learned from each neighbor back to that neighbor. This is known as split horizon. Split horizon with poison reverse allows nodes to advertise routes it learnt from a

allows nodes to advertise routes it learnt from a node back to that node, but with a warning message. LINK STATE ROUTING (LSR) OPEN SHORTEST PATH PROTOCOL (OSPF) DIJKSTRAS ALGORITHM Each node knows state of link to its neighbors and cost. Nodes create an update packet called linkstate packet (LSP) that contains: ID of the node List of neighbors for that node and associated cost 64bit Sequence number Time to live LinkState routing protocols rely on two mechanisms: Reliable flooding of linkstate

on two mechanisms: Reliable flooding of linkstate information to all other nodes Route calculation from the accumulated linkstate knowledge Reliable Flooding Each node sends its LSP out on each of its directly connected links. When a node receives LSP of another node, checks if it has an LSP already for that node. If not, it stores and forwards the LSP on all other links except the incoming one. Else if the received LSP has a bigger sequence number, then it is stored and forwarded. Older LSP for

then it is stored and forwarded. Older LSP for that node is discarded. Otherwise discard the received LSP, since it is not latest for that node. Thus recent LSP of a node eventually reaches all nodes, i.e., reliable flooding. (a) (b) (c) (d) annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 36Flooding of LSP in a small network is as follows: When node X receives Ys LSP (fig a), it floods onto its neighbors A and C (fig b) Nodes A and C forward it to B, but does not sends it back to

C forward it to B, but does not sends it back to X (fig c). Node B receives two copies of LSP with same sequence number. Accepts one LSP and forwards it to D (fig d). Flooding is complete. LSP is generated either periodically or when there is a change in the topology. Route Calculation Each node knows the entire topology, once it has LSP from every other node. Forward search algorithm is used to compute routing table from the received LSPs. Each node maintains two lists, namely Tentative and

node maintains two lists, namely Tentative and Confirmed with entries of the form (Destination, Cost, NextHop). DIJKSTRAS SHORTEST PATH ALGORITHM (FORWARD SEARCH ALGORITHM) 1. Each host maintains two lists, known as Tentative and Confirmed 2. Initialize the Confirmed list with an entry for the Node (Cost  0). 3. Node just added to Confirmed list is called Next. Its LSP is examined. 4. For each neighbor of Next, calculate cost to reach each neighbor as Cost (Node to Next)  Cost (Next to

neighbor as Cost (Node to Next)  Cost (Next to Neighbor). a. If Neighbor is neither in Confirmed nor in Tentative list, then add (Neighbor, Cost, NextHop) to Tentative list. b. If Neighbor is in Tentative list, and Cost is less than existing cost, then replace the entry with (Neighbor, Cost, NextHop). 5. If Tentative list is empty then Stop, otherwise move least cost entry from Tentative list to Confirmed list. Go to Step 2. Example : annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit

Computer Networks Unit 3 37 OPEN SHORTEST PATH FIRST PROTOCOL (OSPF) OSPF is a nonproprietary widely used linkstate routing protocol. OSPF Features are: AuthenticationMalicious host can collapse a network by advertising to reach every host with cost 0. Such disasters are averted by authenticating routing updates. Additional hierarchyDomain is partitioned into areas, i.e., OSPF is more scalable. Load balancingMultiple routes to the same place are assigned same cost. Thus traffic is distributed

assigned same cost. Thus traffic is distributed evenly. Link State Packet Format Version  represents the current version, i.e., 2. Type  represents the type (15) of OSPF message. Type 1  hello message, Type 2  request, Type 3  send , Type 4  acknowledge the receipt of link state messages , Type 5  reserved SourceAddr  identifies the sender AreaId  32bit identifier of the area in which the node is located Checksum  16bit internet checksum Authentication type  1 (simple password), 2 (cryptographic

type  1 (simple password), 2 (cryptographic authentication). Authentication  contains password or cryptographic checksum Difference Between DistanceVector And LinkState Algorithms Distance vector Routing Each node talks only to its directly connected neighbors, but it tells them everything it has learned (i.e., distance to all nodes). Link state Routing Each node talks to all other nodes, but it tells them only what it knows for sure (i.e., only the state of its directly connected links).

only the state of its directly connected links). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 38PATH VECTOR ROUTING (PVR) BORDER GATEWAY PROTOCOL (BGP) Pathvector routing is an asynchronous and distributed routing algorithm. The Pathvector routing is not based on leastcost routing. The best route is determined by the source using the policy it imposes on the route. In other words, the source can control the path. Pathvector routing is not actually used in an internet, and is

is not actually used in an internet, and is mostly designed to route a packet between ISPs. Spanning Trees In pathvector routing, the path from a source to all destinations is determined by the best spanning tree. The best spanning tree is not the leastcost tree. It is the tree determined by the source when it imposes its own policy. If there is more than one route to a destination, the source can choose the route that meets its policy best. A source may apply several policies at the same time.

may apply several policies at the same time. One of the common policies uses the minimum number of nodes to be visited. Another common policy is to avoid some nodes as the middle node in a route. The spanning trees are made, gradually and asynchronously, by each node. When a node is booted, it creates a path vector based on the information it can obtain about its immediate neighbor. A node sends greeting messages to its immediate neighbors to collect these pieces of information. Each node, after

these pieces of information. Each node, after the creation of the initial path vector, sends it to all its immediate neighbors. Each node, when it receives a path vector from a neighbor, updates its path vector using the formula The policy is defined by selecting the best of multiple paths. Pathvector routing also imposes one more condition on this equation. If Path (v, y) includes x, that path is discarded to avoid a loop in the path. In other words, x does not want to visit itself when it

words, x does not want to visit itself when it selects a path to y. Example: The Figure below shows a small internet with only five nodes. Each source has created its own spanning tree that meets its policy. The policy imposed by all sources is to use the minimum number of nodes to reach a destination. The spanning tree selected by A and E is such that the communication does not pass through D as a middle node. Similarly, the spanning tree selected by B is such that the communication does not

by B is such that the communication does not pass through C as a middle node. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 39 Path Vectors made at booting time The Figure below shows all of these path vectors for the example. Not all of these tables are created simultaneously. They are created when each node is booted. The figure also shows how these path vectors are sent to immediate neighbors after they have been created. Updating Path Vectors The Figure below shows the path

Path Vectors The Figure below shows the path vector of node C after two events. In the first event, node C receives a copy of Bs vector, which improves its vector: now it knows how to reach node A. In the second event, node C receives a copy of Ds vector, which does not change its vector. The vector for node C after the first event is stabilized and serves as its forwarding table. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 40BORDER GATEWAY PROTOCOL (BGP) The Border Gateway

40BORDER GATEWAY PROTOCOL (BGP) The Border Gateway Protocol version (BGP) is the only interdomain routing protocol used in the Internet today. BGP4 is based on the pathvector algorithm. It provides information about the reachability of networks in the Internet. BGP views internet as a set of autonomous systems interconnected arbitrarily. Each AS have a border router (gateway), by which packets enter and leave that AS. In above figure, R3 and R4 are border routers. One of the router in each

R4 are border routers. One of the router in each autonomous system is designated as BGP speaker. BGP Speaker exchange reachability information with other BGP speakers, known as external BGP session. BGP advertises complete path as enumerated list of AS (path vector) to reach a particular network. Paths must be without any loop, i.e., AS list is unique. For example, backbone network advertises that networks 128.96 and 192.4.153 can be reached along the path AS1, AS2, AS4. If there are multiple

the path AS1, AS2, AS4. If there are multiple routes to a destination, BGP speaker chooses one based on policy. Speakers need not advertise any route to a destination, even if one exists. Advertised paths can be cancelled, if a linknode on the path goes down. This negative advertisement is known as withdrawn route. Routes are not repeatedly sent. If there is no change, keep alive messages are sent. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 41 iBGP  interior BGP A Variant of

Networks Unit 3 41 iBGP  interior BGP A Variant of BGP Used by routers to update routing information learnt from other speakers to routers inside the autonomous system. Each router in the AS is able to determine the appropriate next hop for all prefixes. 10. UNICAST ROUTING PROTOCOLS A protocol is more than an algorithm. A protocol needs to define its domain of operation, the messages exchanged, communication between routers, and interaction with protocols in other domains. A routing protocol

protocols in other domains. A routing protocol specifies how routers communicate with each other, distributing information that enables them to select routes between any two nodes on a computer network. Routers perform the traffic directing functions on the Internet; data packets are forwarded through the networks of the internet from router to router until they reach their destination computer. Routing algorithms determine the specific choice of route. Each router has a prior knowledge only of

route. Each router has a prior knowledge only of networks attached to it directly. A routing protocol shares this information first among immediate neighbors, and then throughout the network. This way, routers gain knowledge of the topology of the network. The ability of routing protocols to dynamically adjust to changing conditions such as disabled data lines and computers and route data around obstructions is what gives the Internet its survivability and reliability. The specific

its survivability and reliability. The specific characteristics of routing protocols include the manner in which they avoid routing loops, the manner in which they select preferred routes, using information about hop costs, the time they require to reach routing convergence, their scalability, and other factors. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 42INTERNET STRUCTURE Internet has a million networks. Routing table entries per router should be minimized. Link state

entries per router should be minimized. Link state routing protocol is used to partition domain into areas. An routing area is a set of routers configured to exchange linkstate information. Area introduces an additional level of hierarchy. Thus domains can grow without burdening routing protocols. There is one special areathe backbone area, also known as area 0. Routers R1, R2 and R3 are part of backbone area. Routers in backbone area are also part of nonbackbone areas. Such routers are known as

of nonbackbone areas. Such routers are known as Area Border Routers (ABR). Linkstate advertisement is exchanged amongst routers in a nonbackbone area. They do not see LSAs of other areas. For example, area 1 routers are not aware of area 3 routers. ABR advertises routing information in their area to other ABRs. For example,R2 advertises area 2 routing information to R1 and R3, which in turn pass onto their areas. All routers learn how to reach all networks in the domain. When a packet is to be

all networks in the domain. When a packet is to be sent to a network in another area, it goes through backbone area via ABR and reaches the destination area. Routing Areas improve scalability but packets may not travel on the shortest path. INTER DOMAIN ROUTING Internet is organized as autonomous systems (AS) each of which is under the control of a single administrative entity. A corporations complex internal network might be a single AS, as may the network of a single Internet Service Provider

the network of a single Internet Service Provider (ISP). Interdomain routing shares reachability information between autonomous systems. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 43 The basic idea behind autonomous systems is to provide an additional way to hierarchically aggregate routing information in a large internet, thus improving scalability. Internet has backbone networks and sites. Providers connect at a peering point. Traffic on the internet is of two types: Local

Traffic on the internet is of two types: Local Traffic  Traffic within an autonomous system is called local. Transit Traffic  Traffic that passes through an autonomous system is called transit. Autonomous Systems (AS) are classified as: Stub AS  is connected to only one another autonomous system and carries local traffic only (e.g. Small corporation). Multihomed AS  has connections to multiple autonomous systems but refuses to carry transit traffic (e.g. Large corporation). Transit AS  has

traffic (e.g. Large corporation). Transit AS  has connections to multiple autonomous systems and is designed to carry transit traffic (e.g. Backbone service provider). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 44Policies Used By Autonomous Systems : ProviderCustomerProvider advertises the routes it knows, to the customer and advertises the routes learnt from customer to everyone. CustomerProviderCustomers want the routes to be diverted to them. So they advertise their own

be diverted to them. So they advertise their own prefixes and routes learned from customers to provider and advertise routes learned from provider to customers. PeerTwo providers access to each others customers without having to pay. CHALLENGES IN INTERDOMAIN ROUTING PROTOCOL Each autonomous system has an intradomain routing protocol, its own policy and metric. Internet backbone must be able to route packets to the destination that complies with policies of autonomous system along a loopless

policies of autonomous system along a loopless path. Service providers have trust deficit and may not trust advertisements by other AS, or may refuse to carry traffic from other AS. TYPES OF ROUTING PROTOCOLS Two types of Routing Protocols are used in the Internet: 1) Intradomain routing Routing within a single autonomous system Routing Information Protocol (RIP)  based on the distancevector algorithm  (REFER distancevector routing algorithm) Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)  based on the

Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)  based on the linkstate algorithm  (REFER linkstate routing algorithm) 2) Interdomain routing Routing between autonomous systems. Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)  based on the pathvector algorithm  (REFER Path Vector routing algorithm) annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 4511. MULTICASTING In multicasting, there is one source and a group of destinations. Multicast supports efficient delivery to multiple destinations. The relationship is

to multiple destinations. The relationship is one to many or manytomany. OnetoMany (Source Specific Multicast) oRadio station broadcast oTransmitting news, stockprice oSoftware updates to multiple hosts ManytoMany (Any Source Multicast) oMultimedia teleconferencing oOnline multiplayer games oDistributed simulations In this type of communication, the source address is a unicast address, but the destination address is a group address. The group address defines the members of the group. In

group address defines the members of the group. In multicasting, a multicast router may have to send out copies of the same datagram through more than one interface. Hosts that are members of a group receive copies of any packets sent to that groups multicast address A host can be in multiple groups A host can join and leave groups A host signals its desire to join or leave a multicast group by communicating with its local router using a special protocol. In IPv4, the protocol is Internet Group

protocol. In IPv4, the protocol is Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) In IPv6, the protocol is Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) IGMP OR MLD PROTOCOL Hosts communicate their desire to join  leave a multicast group to a router using Internet Group Message Protocol (IGMP) in IPv4 or Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) in IPv6. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 46Provides multicast routers with information about the membership status of hosts connected to the

the membership status of hosts connected to the network. Enables a multicast router to create and update list of loyal members for each group. MULTICAST ADDRESSING Multicast address is associated with a group, whose members are dynamic. Each group has its own IP multicast address. IP addresses reserved for multicasting are Class D in IPv4 (Class D 224.0.0.1 to 239.255.255.255), 1111 1111 prefix in IPv6. o Hosts that are members of a group receive copy of the packet sent when destination contains

copy of the packet sent when destination contains group address. MULTICASTING VERSUS MULTIPLE UNICASTING Multicasting starts with a single packet from the source that is duplicated by the routers. The destination address in each packet is the same for all duplicates. Only a single copy of the packet travels between any two routers. In multiple unicasting, several packets start from the source. If there are three destinations, for example, the source sends three packets, each with a different

source sends three packets, each with a different unicast destination address. There may be multiple copies traveling between two routers NEED FOR MULTICAST Without support for multicast A source needs to send a separate packet with the identical data to each member of the group Source needs to keep track of the IP address of each member in the group Using IP multicast Sending host does not send multiple copies of the packet A host sends a single copy of the packet addressed to the groups

single copy of the packet addressed to the groups multicast address The sending host does not need to know the individual unicast IP address of each member annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 47TYPES OF MULTICASTING SourceSpecific Multicast  In sourcespecific multicast (onetomany model), receiver specifies multicast group and sender from which it is interested to receive packets. Example: Internet radio broadcasts. Any Source Multicast  Supplements any source multicast

Source Multicast  Supplements any source multicast (manytomany model). MULTICAST APPLICATIONS Access to Distributed Databases Information Dissemination Teleconferencing. Distance Learning MULTICAST ROUTING To support multicast, a router must additionally have multicast forwarding tables that indicate, based on multicast address, which links to use to forward the multicast packet. Unicast forwarding tables collectively specify a set of paths. Multicast forwarding tables collectively specify a set

forwarding tables collectively specify a set of trees Multicast distribution trees. Multicast routing is the process by which multicast distribution trees are determined. To support multicasting, routers additionally build multicast forwarding tables. Multicast forwarding table is a tree structure, known as multicast distribution trees. Internet multicast is implemented on physical networks that support broadcasting by extending forwarding functions. MULTICAST DISTRIBUTION TREES There are two

MULTICAST DISTRIBUTION TREES There are two types of Multicast Distribution Trees used in multicast routing. They are SourceBased Tree: (DVMRP) For each combination of (source , group), there is a shortest path spanning tree. Flood and prune Send multicast traffic everywhere Prune edges that are not actively subscribed to group Linkstate Routers flood groups they would like to receive Compute shortestpath trees on demand Shared Tree (PIM) Single distributed tree shared among all sources Does not

distributed tree shared among all sources Does not include its own topology discovery mechanism, but instead uses routing information supplied by other routing protocols Specify rendezvous point (RP) for group Senders send packets to RP, receivers join at RP annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 48RP multicasts to receivers; Fixup tree for optimization RendezvousPoint Tree: one router is the center of the group and therefore the root of the tree. MULTICAST ROUTING

therefore the root of the tree. MULTICAST ROUTING PROTOCOLS Internet multicast is implemented on physical networks that support broadcasting by extending forwarding functions. Major multicast routing protocols are: 1. DistanceVector Multicast Routing Protocol (DVMRP) 2. Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM) 1. Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol The DVMRP, is a routing protocol used to share information between routers to facilitate the transportation of IP multicast packets among

the transportation of IP multicast packets among networks. It formed the basis of the Internets historic multicast backbone. Distance vector routing for unicast is extended to support multicast routing. Each router maintains a routing table for all destination through exchange of distance vectors. DVMRP is also known as floodandprune protocol. DVMRP consists of two major components: A conventional distancevector routing protocol, like RIP A protocol for determining how to forward multicast

protocol for determining how to forward multicast packets, based on the routing table DVMRP router forwards a packet if The packet arrived from the link used to reach the source of the packet If downstream links have not pruned the tree DVMRP protocol uses the basic packet types as follows: The forwarding table of DVMRP is as follows: annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 49Multicasting is added to distancevector routing in four stages. Flooding Reverse Path Forwarding

in four stages. Flooding Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) Reverse Path Broadcasting (RPB) Reverse Path Multicast (RPM) Flooding Router on receiving a multicast packet from source S to a Destination from NextHop, forwards the packet on all outgoing links. Packet is flooded and looped back to S. The drawbacks are: o It floods a network, even if it has no members for that group. o Packets are forwarded by each router connected to a LAN, i.e., duplicate flooding Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) RPF

flooding Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) RPF eliminates the looping problem in the flooding process. Only one copy is forwarded and the other copies are discarded. RPF forces the router to forward a multicast packet from one specific interface: the one which has come through the shortest path from the source to the router. Packet is flooded but not looped back to S. ReversePath Broadcasting (RPB) RPB does not multicast the packet, it broadcasts it. RPB creates a shortest path broadcast tree from

RPB creates a shortest path broadcast tree from the source to each destination. It guarantees that each destination receives one and only one copy of the packet. We need to prevent each network from receiving more than one copy of the packet. If a network is connected to more than one router, it may receive a copy of the packet from each router. One router identified as parent called designated Router (DR). Only parent router forwards multicast packets from source S to the attached network. When

from source S to the attached network. When a router that is not the parent of the attached network receives a multicast packet, it simply drops the packet. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 50 ReversePath Multicasting (RPM) To increase efficiency, the multicast packet must reach only those networks that have active members for that particular group. RPM adds pruning and grafting to RPB to create a multicast shortest path tree that supports dynamic membership

path tree that supports dynamic membership changes. Pruning: Sent from routers receiving multicast traffic for which they have no active group members Prunes the tree created by DVMRP Stops needless data from being sent Grafting: Used after a branch has been pruned back Sent by a router that has a host that joins a multicast group Goes from router to router until a router active on the multicast group is reached Sent for the following cases  A new host member joins a group A new dependent router

host member joins a group A new dependent router joins a pruned branch A dependent router restarts on a pruned branch annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 512. Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM) PIM divides multicast routing problem into sparse and dense mode. PIM sparse mode (PIMSM) is widely used. PIM does not rely on any type of unicast routing protocol, hence protocol independent. Routers explicitly join and leave multicast group using Join and Prune messages. One

multicast group using Join and Prune messages. One of the router is designated as rendezvous point (RP) for each group in a domain to receive PIM messages. Multicast forwarding tree is built as a result of routers sending Join messages to RP. Two types of trees to be constructed: Shared tree  used by all senders Sourcespecific tree  used only by a specific sending host The normal mode of operation creates the shared tree first, followed by one or more sourcespecific trees Shared Tree When a

or more sourcespecific trees Shared Tree When a router sends Join message for group G to RP, it goes through a set of routers. Join message is wildcarded (), i.e., it is applicable to all senders. Routers create an entry (, G) in its forwarding table for the shared tree. Interface on which the Join arrived is marked to forward packets for that group. Forwards Join towards rendezvous router RP. Eventually, the message arrives at RP. Thus a shared tree with RP as root is formed. Example Router R4

tree with RP as root is formed. Example Router R4 sends Join message for group G to rendezvous router RP. Join message is received by router R2. It makes an entry (, G) in its table and forwards the message to RP. When R5 sends Join message for group G, R2 does not forwards the Join. It adds an outgoing interface to the forwarding table created for that group. As routers send Join message for a group, branches are added to the tree, i.e., shared. Multicast packets sent from hosts are forwarded

Multicast packets sent from hosts are forwarded to designated router RP. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 52Suppose router R1, receives a message to group G. oR1 has no state for group G. o Encapsulates the multicast packet in a Register message. o Multicast packet is tunneled along the way to RP. RP decapsulates the packet and sends multicast packet onto the shared tree, towards R2. R2 forwards the multicast packet to routers R4 and R5 that have members for group

to routers R4 and R5 that have members for group G. SourceSpecific Tree RP can force routers to know about group G, by sending Join message to the sending host, so that tunneling can be avoided. Intermediary routers create senderspecific entry (S, G) in their tables. Thus a sourcespecific route from R1 to RP is formed. If there is high rate of packets sent from a sender to a group G, then shared tree is replaced by sourcespecific tree with sender as root. Example Rendezvous router RP sends a

as root. Example Rendezvous router RP sends a Join message to the host router R1. Router R3 learns about group G through the message sent by RP. Router R4 send a sourcespecific Join due to high rate of packets from sender. Router R2 learns about group G through the message sent by R4. Eventually a sourcespecific tree is formed with R1 as root. Analysis of PIM Protocol independent because, tree is based on Join messages via shortest path. Shared trees are more scalable than sourcespecific trees.

trees are more scalable than sourcespecific trees. Sourcespecific trees enable efficient routing than shared trees. 12. IPV6  NEXT GENERATION IP IPv6 was evolved to solve address space problem and offers rich set of services. Some hosts and routers will run IPv4 only, some will run IPv4 and IPv6 and some will run IPv6 only. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 53DRAWBACKS OF IPV4 Despite subnetting and CIDR, address depletion is still a longterm problem. Internet must

is still a longterm problem. Internet must accommodate realtime audio and video transmission that requires minimum delay strategies and reservation of resources. Internet must provide encryption and authentication of data for some applications FEATURES OF IPV6 1.Better header format  IPv6 uses a new header format in which options are separated from the base header and inserted, when needed, between the base header and the data. This simplifies and speeds up the routing process because most of

and speeds up the routing process because most of the options do not need to be checked by routers. 2.New options  IPv6 has new options to allow for additional functionalities. 3.Allowance for extension  IPv6 is designed to allow the extension of the protocol if required by new technologies or applications. 4.Support for resource allocation  In IPv6, the typeofservice field has been removed, but two new fields, traffic class and flow label, have been added to enable the source to request special

been added to enable the source to request special handling of the packet. This mechanism can be used to support traffic such as realtime audio and video. Additional Features : 1. Need to accommodate scalable routing and addressing 2. Support for realtime services 3. Security support 4.Autoconguration  The ability of hosts to automatically congure themselves with such information as their own IP address and domain name. 5. Enhanced routing functionality, including support for mobile hosts 6.

including support for mobile hosts 6. Transition from ipv4 to ipv6 ADDRESS SPACE ALLOCATION OF IPV6 IPv6 provides a 128bit address space to handle up to 3.4  1038 nodes. IPv6 uses classless addressing, but classification is based on MSBs. The address space is subdivided in various ways based on the leading bits. The current assignment of prexes is listed in Table A node may be assigned an IPv4compatible IPv6 address by zeroextending a 32bit IPv4 addressto128 bits.

by zeroextending a 32bit IPv4 addressto128 bits. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 54 A node that is only capable of understanding IPv4 can be assigned an IPv4 mapped IPv6 address by prexing the 32bit IPv4 address with 2 bytes of all 1s and then zeroextending the result to 128 bits. GLOBAL UNICAST Large chunks (87) of address space are left unassigned for future use. IPv6 defines two types of local addresses for private networks. oLink local  enables a host to

private networks. oLink local  enables a host to construct an address that need not be globally unique. oSite local  allows valid local address for use in a isolated site with several subnets. Reserved addresses start with prefix of eight 0s. oUnspecified address is used when a host does not know its address oLoopback address is used for testing purposes before connecting oCompatible address is used when IPv6 hosts uses IPv4 network o Mapped address is used when a IPv6 host communicates with a

is used when a IPv6 host communicates with a IPv4 host IPv6 defines anycast address, assigned to a set of interfaces. Packet with anycast address is delivered to only one of the nearest interface. ADDRESS NOTATION OF IPV6 Standard representation of IPv6 address is x : x : x : x : x : x : x : x where x is a 16bit hexadecimal address separated by colon (:). For example, 47CD : 1234 : 4422 : ACO2 : 0022 : 1234 : A456 : 0124 IPv6 address with contiguous 0 bytes can be written compactly. For example,

0 bytes can be written compactly. For example, 47CD : 0000 : 0000 : 0000 : 0000 : 0000 : A456 : 0124  47CD : : A456 : 0124 IPv4 address is mapped to IPv6 address by prefixing the 32bit IPv4 address with 2 bytes of 1s and then zeroextending the result to 128 bits. For example, 128.96.33.81  : : FFFF : 128.96.33.81 This notation is called as CIDR notation or slash notation. ADDRESS AGGREGATION OF IPV6 IPv6 provides aggregation of routing information to reduce the burden on routers. Aggregation is

to reduce the burden on routers. Aggregation is done by assigning prefixes at continental level. For example, if all addresses in Europe have a common prefix, then routers in other continents would need one routing table entry for all networks in Europe. Prefix  All addresses in the same continent have a common prefix RegistryID  identifies the continent ProviderID  identifies the provider for Internet access, i.e., ISP. SubscriberID  specifies the subscriber identifier

SubscriberID  specifies the subscriber identifier annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 55 SubnetID  contains subnet of the subscriber. InterfaceID contains link level or physical address. PACKET FORMAT OF IPV6 IPv6 base header is 40 bytes long. Version  specifies the IP version, i.e., 6. Traffic Class  defines priority of the packet with respect to traffic congestion. It is either congestioncontrolled or noncongestion controlled Flow Label  provides special handling for

Flow Label  provides special handling for a particular flow of data. Router handles different flows with the help of a flow table. Payload Len  gives length of the packet, excluding IPv6 header. Next Header  Options are specified as a header following IP header. NextHeader contains a pointer to optional headers. Hop Limit  Gives the TTL value of a packet. Source Address  Destination Address  16byte addresses of source and destination host Extension Headers Extension header provides greater

Headers Extension header provides greater functionality to IPv6. Base header may be followed by six extension headers. Each extension header contains a NextHeader field to identify the header following it. HopbyHop  source host passes information to all routers visited by the packet Destination  source host information is passed to the destination only. Source Routing  routing information provided by the source host. Fragmentation  In IPv6, only the source host can fragment. Source uses a path

the source host can fragment. Source uses a path MTU discovery technique to find smallest MTU on the path. Authentication  used to validate the sender and ensures data integrity. ESP (Encrypted Security Payload)  provides confidentiality against eavesdropping. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 3 56ADVANCED CAPABILITIES OF IPV6 Auto Configuration  Auto or stateless configuration of IP address to hosts without the need for a DHCP server, i.e., plug and play. Advanced

for a DHCP server, i.e., plug and play. Advanced Routing  Enhanced routing support for mobile hosts is provided. Additional Functions  Enhanced routing functionality with support for mobile hosts. Security  Encryption and authentication options provide confidentiality and integrity. Resource allocation  Flow label enables the source to request special handling of realtime audio and video packets ADVANTAGES OF IPV6 Address space  IPv6 uses 128bit address whereas IPv4 uses 32bit address. Hence

address whereas IPv4 uses 32bit address. Hence IPv6 has huge address space whereas IPv4 faces address shortage problem. Header format  Unlike IPv4, optional headers are separated from base header in IPv6. Each router thus need not process unwanted addition information. Extensible  Unassigned IPv6 addresses can accommodate needs of future technologies. DualStack Operation and Tunneling In dualstack, nodes run both IPv6 and IPv4, uses Version field to decide which stack should process an arriving

to decide which stack should process an arriving packet. IPv6 packet is encapsulated with an IPv4 packet as it travels through an IPv4 network. This is known as tunneling and packet contains tunnel endpoint as its destination address. Network Address Translation NAT enables hosts on a network to use Internet with local addresses. Addresses reserved for internal use range from 172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255 Organization must have single connection to the Internet through a router that runs the NAT

to the Internet through a router that runs the NAT software. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 11. INTRODUCTION The transport layer is the fourth layer of the OSI model and is the core of the Internet model. It responds to service requests from the session layer and issues service requests to the network Layer. The transport layer provides transparent transfer of data between hosts. It provides endtoend control and information transfer with the quality of service

information transfer with the quality of service needed by the application program. It is the first true endtoend layer, implemented in all End Systems (ES). TRANSPORT LAYER FUNCTIONS  SERVICES The transport layer is located between the network layer and the application layer. The transport layer is responsible for providing services to the application layer; it receives services from the network layer. The services that can be provided by the transport layer are 1.ProcesstoProcess Communication

layer are 1.ProcesstoProcess Communication 2.Addressing : Port Numbers 3.Encapsulation and Decapsulation 4.Multiplexing and Demultiplexing 5.Flow Control 6.Error Control 7.Congestion ControlUNIT  IV : TRANSPORT LAYER Introduction  Transport Layer Protocols  Services  Port Numbers  User Datagram Protocol  Transmission Control Protocol  SCTP. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 2ProcesstoProcess Communication The Transport Layer is responsible for delivering data to the

Layer is responsible for delivering data to the appropriate application process on the host computers. This involves multiplexing of data from different application processes, i.e. forming data packets, and adding source and destination port numbers in the header of each Transport Layer data packet. Together with the source and destination IP address, the port numbers constitutes a network socket, i.e. an identification address of the processtoprocess communication. Addressing: Port Numbers

communication. Addressing: Port Numbers Ports are the essential ways to address multiple entities in the same location. Using port addressing it is possible to use more than one networkbased application at the same time. Three types of Port numbers are used : Wellknown ports  These are permanent port numbers. They range between 0 to 1023.These port numbers are used by Server Process. Registered ports  The ports ranging from 1024 to 49,151 are not assigned or controlled. Ephemeral ports (Dynamic

assigned or controlled. Ephemeral ports (Dynamic Ports)  These are temporary port numbers. They range between 4915265535.These port numbers are used by Client Process. Encapsulation and Decapsulation To send a message from one process to another, the transportlayer protocol encapsulates and decapsulates messages. Encapsulation happens at the sender site. The transport layer receives the data and adds the transportlayer header. Decapsulation happens at the receiver site. When the message arrives

at the receiver site. When the message arrives at the destination transport layer, the header is dropped and the transport layer delivers the message to the process running at the application layer. Multiplexing and Demultiplexing Whenever an entity accepts items from more than one source, this is referred to as multiplexing (many to one). Whenever an entity delivers items to more than one source, this is referred to as demultiplexing (one to many). The transport layer at the source performs

many). The transport layer at the source performs multiplexing The transport layer at the destination performs demultiplexing Flow Control Flow Control is the process of managing the rate of data transmission between two nodes to prevent a fast sender from overwhelming a slow receiver. It provides a mechanism for the receiver to control the transmission speed, so that the receiving node is not overwhelmed with data from transmitting node. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks

Computer Networks Unit 4 3 Error Control Error control at the transport layer is responsible for 1. Detecting and discarding corrupted packets. 2. Keeping track of lost and discarded packets and resending them. 3. Recognizing duplicate packets and discarding them. 4. Buffering outoforder packets until the missing packets arrive. Error Control involves Error Detection and Error Correction Congestion Control Congestion in a network may occur if the load on the network (the number of packets sent

load on the network (the number of packets sent to the network) is greater than the capacity of the network (the number of packets a network can handle). Congestion control refers to the mechanisms and techniques that control the congestion and keep the load below the capacity. Congestion Control refers to techniques and mechanisms that can either prevent congestion, before it happens, or remove congestion, after it has happened Congestion control mechanisms are divided into two categories, 1.

mechanisms are divided into two categories, 1. Open loop  prevent the congestion before it happens. 2. Closed loop  remove the congestion after it happens. 2. PORT NUMBERS A transportlayer protocol usually has several responsibilities. One is to create a processtoprocess communication. Processes are programs that run on hosts. It could be either server or client. A process on the local host, called a client, needs services from a process usually on the remote host, called a server. Processes are

on the remote host, called a server. Processes are assigned a unique 16bit port number on that host. Port numbers provide endtoend addresses at the transport layer They also provide multiplexing and demultiplexing at this layer. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 4The port numbers are integers between 0 and 65,535 . ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) has divided the port numbers into three ranges: Wellknown ports Registered Ephemeral ports

ranges: Wellknown ports Registered Ephemeral ports (Dynamic Ports)  WELLKNOWN PORTS These are permanent port numbers used by the servers. They range between 0 to 1023. This port number cannot be chosen randomly. These port numbers are universal port numbers for servers. Every client process knows the wellknown port number of the corresponding server process. For example, while the daytime client process, a wellknown client program, can use an ephemeral (temporary) port number, 52,000, to

an ephemeral (temporary) port number, 52,000, to identify itself, the daytime server process must use the wellknown (permanent) port number 13. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 5 EPHEMERAL PORTS (DYNAMIC PORTS) The client program defines itself with a port number, called the ephemeral port number. The word ephemeral means shortlived and is used because the life of a client is normally short. An ephemeral port number is recommended to be greater than 1023. These port

is recommended to be greater than 1023. These port number ranges from 49,152 to 65,535 . They are neither controlled nor registered. They can be used as temporary or private port numbers. REGISTERED PORTS The ports ranging from 1024 to 49,151 are not assigned or controlled. 3. TRANSPORT LAYER PROTOCOLS Three protocols are associated with the Transport layer. They are (1) UDP User Datagram Protocol (2) TCP  Transmission Control Protocol (3) SCTP  Stream Control Transmission Protocol Each protocol

Stream Control Transmission Protocol Each protocol provides a different type of service and should be used appropriately. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 6UDP  UDP is an unreliable connectionless transportlayer protocol used for its simplicity and efficiency in applications where error control can be provided by the applicationlayer process. TCP  TCP is a reliable connectionoriented protocol that can be used in any application where reliability is important. SCTP

application where reliability is important. SCTP  SCTP is a new transportlayer protocol designed to combine some features of UDP and TCP in an effort to create a better protocol for multimedia communication. 4. USER DATAGRAM PROTOCOL (UDP) User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a connectionless, unreliable transport protocol. UDP adds processtoprocess communication to besteffort service provided by IP. UDP is a very simple protocol using a minimum of overhead. UDP is a simple demultiplexer, which

of overhead. UDP is a simple demultiplexer, which allows multiple processes on each host to communicate. UDP does not provide flow control , reliable or ordered delivery. UDP can be used to send small message where reliability is not expected. Sending a small message using UDP takes much less interaction between the sender and receiver. UDP allow processes to indirectly identify each other using an abstract locator called port or mailbox UDP PORTS Processes (serverclient) are identified by an

Processes (serverclient) are identified by an abstract locator known as port. Server accepts message at well known port. Some wellknown UDP ports are 7Echo, 53DNS, 111RPC, 161SNMP, etc.  port, host  pair is used as key for demultiplexing. Ports are implemented as a message queue. When a message arrives, UDP appends it to end of the queue. When queue is full, the message is discarded. When a message is read, it is removed from the queue. When an application process wants to receive a message, one

process wants to receive a message, one is removed from the front of the queue. If the queue is empty, the process blocks until a message becomes available. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 7 UDP DATAGRAM (PACKET) FORMAT UDP packets are known as user datagrams . These user datagrams, have a fixedsize header of 8 bytes made of four fields, each of 2 bytes (16 bits). Source Port Number Port number used by process on source host with 16 bits long. If the source host is

host with 16 bits long. If the source host is client (sending request) then the port number is an temporary one requested by the process and chosen by UDP. If the source is server (sending response) then it is well known port number. Destination Port Number Port number used by process on Destination host with 16 bits long. If the destination host is the server (a client sending request) then the port number is a well known port number. If the destination host is client (a server sending

the destination host is client (a server sending response) then port number is an temporary one copied by server from the request packet. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 8Length This field denotes the total length of the UDP Packet (Header plus data) The total length of any UDP datagram can be from 0 to 65,535 bytes. Checksum UDP computes its checksum over the UDP header, the contents of the message body, and something called the pseudoheader. The pseudoheader

called the pseudoheader. The pseudoheader consists of three fields from the IP headerprotocol number, source IP address, destination IP address plus the UDP length field. Data Data field defines tha actual payload to be transmitted. Its size is variable. UDP SERVICES ProcesstoProcess Communication UDP provides processtoprocess communication using socket addresses, a combination of IP addresses and port numbers. Connectionless Services UDP provides a connectionless service. There is no connection

a connectionless service. There is no connection establishment and no connection termination . Each user datagram sent by UDP is an independent datagram. There is no relationship between the different user datagrams even if they are coming from the same source process and going to the same destination program. The user datagrams are not numbered. Each user datagram can travel on a different path. Flow Control UDP is a very simple protocol. There is no flow control, and hence no window mechanism.

is no flow control, and hence no window mechanism. The receiver may overflow with incoming messages. The lack of flow control means that the process using UDP should provide for this service, if needed. Error Control There is no error control mechanism in UDP except for the checksum. This means that the sender does not know if a message has been lost or duplicated. When the receiver detects an error through the checksum, the user datagram is silently discarded.

checksum, the user datagram is silently discarded. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 9The lack of error control means that the process using UDP should provide for this service, if needed. Checksum UDP checksum calculation includes three sections: a pseudoheader, the UDP header, and the data coming from the application layer. The pseudoheader is the part of the header in which the user datagram is to be encapsulated with some fields filled with 0s. Optional Inclusion

some fields filled with 0s. Optional Inclusion of Checksum The sender of a UDP packet can choose not to calculate the checksum. In this case, the checksum field is filled with all 0s before being sent. In the situation where the sender decides to calculate the checksum, but it happens that the result is all 0s, the checksum is changed to all 1s before the packet is sent. In other words, the sender complements the sum two times. Congestion Control Since UDP is a connectionless protocol, it does

Since UDP is a connectionless protocol, it does not provide congestion control. UDP assumes that the packets sent are small and sporadic(occasionally or at irregular intervals) and cannot create congestion in the network. This assumption may or may not be true, when UDP is used for interactive realtime transfer of audio and video. Encapsulation and Decapsulation To send a message from one process to another, the UDP protocol encapsulates and decapsulates messages. Queuing In UDP, queues are

decapsulates messages. Queuing In UDP, queues are associated with ports. At the client site, when a process starts, it requests a port number from the operating system. Some implementations create both an incoming and an outgoing queue associated with each process. Other implementations create only an incoming queue associated with each process. Multiplexing and Demultiplexing In a host running a transport protocol suite, there is only one UDP but possibly several processes that may want to use

possibly several processes that may want to use the services of UDP. To handle this situation, UDP multiplexes and demultiplexes. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 10APPLICATIONS OF UDP UDP is used for management processes such as SNMP. UDP is used for route updating protocols such as RIP. UDP is a suitable transport protocol for multicasting. Multicasting capability is embedded in the UDP software UDP is suitable for a process with internal flow and error control

for a process with internal flow and error control mechanisms such as Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP). UDP is suitable for a process that requires simple requestresponse communication with little concern for flow and error control. UDP is normally used for interactive realtime applications that cannot tolerate uneven delay between sections of a received message. 5. TRANSMISSION CONTROL PROTOCOL (TCP) TCP is a reliable, connectionoriented, bytestream protocol. TCP guarantees the reliable,

bytestream protocol. TCP guarantees the reliable, inorder delivery of a stream of bytes. It is a fullduplex protocol, meaning that each TCP connection supports a pair of byte streams, one flowing in each direction. TCP includes a flowcontrol mechanism for each of these byte streams that allow the receiver to limit how much data the sender can transmit at a given time. TCP supports a demultiplexing mechanism that allows multiple application programs on any given host to simultaneously carry on a

on any given host to simultaneously carry on a conversation with their peers. TCP also implements congestioncontrol mechanism. The idea of this mechanism is to prevent sender from overloading the network. Flow control is an end to end issue, whereas congestion control is concerned with how host and network interact. TCP SERVICES ProcesstoProcess Communication TCP provides processtoprocess communication using port numbers. Stream Delivery Service TCP is a streamoriented protocol. TCP allows the

TCP is a streamoriented protocol. TCP allows the sending process to deliver data as a stream of bytes and allows the receiving process to obtain data as a stream of bytes. TCP creates an environment in which the two processes seem to be connected by an imaginary tube that carries their bytes across the Internet. The sending process produces (writes to) the stream and the receiving process consumes (reads from) it. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 11 FullDuplex

Computer Networks Unit 4 11 FullDuplex Communication TCP offers fullduplex service, where data can flow in both directions at the same time. Each TCP endpoint then has its own sending and receiving buffer, and segments move in both directions. Multiplexing and Demultiplexing TCP performs multiplexing at the sender and demultiplexing at the receiver. ConnectionOriented Service TCP is a connectionoriented protocol. A connection needs to be established for each pair of processes. When a process at

for each pair of processes. When a process at site A wants to send to and receive data from another process at site B, the following three phases occur: 1. The two TCPs establish a logical connection between them. 2. Data are exchanged in both directions. 3. The connection is terminated. Reliable Service TCP is a reliable transport protocol. It uses an acknowledgment mechanism to check the safe and sound arrival of data. TCP SEGMENT A packet in TCP is called a segment. Data unit exchanged

in TCP is called a segment. Data unit exchanged between TCP peers are called segments. A TCP segment encapsulates the data received from the application layer. The TCP segment is encapsulated in an IP datagram, which in turn is encapsulated in a frame at the datalink layer. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 12 TCP is a byteoriented protocol, which means that the sender writes bytes into a TCP connection and the receiver reads bytes out of the TCP connection. TCP does

reads bytes out of the TCP connection. TCP does not, itself, transmit individual bytes over the Internet. TCP on the source host buffers enough bytes from the sending process to fill a reasonably sized packet and then sends this packet to its peer on the destination host. TCP on the destination host then empties the contents of the packet into a receive buffer, and the receiving process reads from this buffer at its leisure. TCP connection supports byte streams flowing in both directions. The

byte streams flowing in both directions. The packets exchanged between TCP peers are called segments, since each one carries a segment of the byte stream. TCP PACKET FORMAT Each TCP segment contains the header plus the data. The segment consists of a header of 20 to 60 bytes, followed by data from the application program. The header is 20 bytes if there are no options and up to 60 bytes if it contains options. SrcPort and DstPortport number of source and destination process. SequenceNumcontains

and destination process. SequenceNumcontains sequence number, i.e. first byte of data segment. Acknowledgment byte number of segment, the receiver expects next. HdrLenLength of TCP header as 4byte words. Flags contains six control bits known as flags. o URG  segment contains urgent data. oACK  value of acknowledgment field is valid. oPUSH  sender has invoked the push operation. oRESET  receiver wants to abort the connection. o SYN  synchronize sequence numbers during connection establishment.

sequence numbers during connection establishment. oFIN  terminates the TCP connection. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 13 Advertised Windowdefines receivers window size and acts as flow control. ChecksumIt is computed over TCP header, Data, and pseudo header containing IP fields (Length, SourceAddr  DestinationAddr). UrgPtr  used when the segment contains urgent data. It defines a value that must be added to the sequence number. Options  There can be up to 40 bytes

number. Options  There can be up to 40 bytes of optional information in the TCP header. TCP CONNECTION MANAGEMENT TCP is connectionoriented. A connectionoriented transport protocol establishes a logical path between the source and destination. All of the segments belonging to a message are then sent over this logical path. In TCP, connectionoriented transmission requires three phases: Connection Establishment, Data Transfer and Connection Termination. Connection Establishment While opening a TCP

Connection Establishment While opening a TCP connection the two nodes(client and server) want to agree on a set of parameters. The parameters are the starting sequence numbers that is to be used for their respective byte streams. Connection establishment in TCP is a threeway handshaking. 1. Client sends a SYN segment to the server containing its initial sequence number (Flags  SYN, SequenceNum  x) 2. Server responds with a segment that acknowledges clients segment and specifies its initial

clients segment and specifies its initial sequence number (Flags  SYN  ACK, ACK  x  1 SequenceNum  y). 3. Finally, client responds with a segment that acknowledges servers sequence number (Flags  ACK, ACK  y  1). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 14The reason that each side acknowledges a sequence number that is one larger than the one sent is that the Acknowledgment field actually identifies the next sequence number expected, A timer is scheduled for each of the

expected, A timer is scheduled for each of the first two segments, and if the expected response is not received, the segment is retransmitted. Data Transfer After connection is established, bidirectional data transfer can take place. The client and server can send data and acknowledgments in both directions. The data traveling in the same direction as an acknowledgment are carried on the same segment. The acknowledgment is piggybacked with the data. Connection Termination Connection termination

Connection Termination Connection termination or teardown can be done in two ways : Threeway Close and HalfClose Threeway CloseBoth client and server close simultaneously. Client sends a FIN segment. The FIN segment can include last chunk of data. Server responds with FIN  ACK segment to inform its closing. Finally, client sends an ACK segment HalfCloseClient stops sending but receives data. Client halfcloses the connection by sending a FIN segment. Server sends an ACK segment. Data transfer

Server sends an ACK segment. Data transfer from client to the server stops. After sending all data, server sends FIN segment to client, which is acknowledged by the client. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 15STATE TRANSITION DIAGRAM To keep track of all the different events happening during connection establishment, connection termination, and data transfer, TCP is specified as the finite state machine (FSM). The transition from one state to another is shown using

from one state to another is shown using directed lines. States involved in opening and closing a connection is shown above and below ESTABLISHED state respectively. States Involved in TCP : annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 16 Opening a TCP Connection 1. Server invokes a passive open on TCP, which causes TCP to move to LISTEN state 2. Client does an active open, which causes its TCP to send a SYN segment to the server and move to SYNSENT state. 3. When SYN segment

and move to SYNSENT state. 3. When SYN segment arrives at the server, it moves to SYNRCVD state and responds with a SYN  ACK segment. 4. Arrival of SYN  ACK segment causes the client to move to ESTABLISHED state and sends an ACK to the server. 5. When ACK arrives, the server finally moves to ESTABLISHED state. Closing a TCP Connection Client  Server can independently close its half of the connection or simultaneously. Transitions from ESTABLISHED to CLOSED state are: One side closes: ESTABLISHED

to CLOSED state are: One side closes: ESTABLISHED  FINWAIT1  FINWAIT2  TIMEWAIT  CLOSED Other side closes: ESTABLISHED  CLOSEWAIT  LASTACK  CLOSED Simultaneous close: ESTABLISHED  FINWAIT1  CLOSING  TIMEWAIT  CLOSED TCP FLOW CONTROL TCP uses a variant of sliding window known as adaptive flow control that: o guarantees reliable delivery of data o ensures ordered delivery of data oenforces flow control at the sender Receiver advertises its window size to the sender using AdvertisedWindow field.

size to the sender using AdvertisedWindow field. Sender thus cannot have unacknowledged data greater than AdvertisedWindow. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 17Send Buffer Sending TCP maintains send buffer which contains 3 segments (1) acknowledged data (2) unacknowledged data (3) data to be transmitted. Send buffer maintains three pointers (1) LastByteAcked, (2) LastByteSent, and (3) LastByteWritten such that: LastByteAcked  LastByteSent  LastByteWritten A byte can

LastByteSent  LastByteWritten A byte can be sent only after being written and only a sent byte can be acknowledged. Bytes to the left of LastByteAcked are not kept as it had been acknowledged. Receive Buffer Receiving TCP maintains receive buffer to hold data even if it arrives outoforder. Receive buffer maintains three pointers namely (1) LastByteRead, (2) NextByteExpected, and (3) LastByteRcvd such that: LastByteRead  NextByteExpected  LastByteRcvd  1 A byte cannot be read until that byte and

1 A byte cannot be read until that byte and all preceding bytes have been received. If data is received in order, then NextByteExpected  LastByteRcvd  1 Bytes to the left of LastByteRead are not buffered, since it is read by the application. Flow Control in TCP Size of send and receive buffer is MaxSendBuffer and MaxRcvBuffer respectively. Sending TCP prevents overflowing of send buffer by maintaining LastByteWritten  LastByteAcked  MaxSendBuer Receiving TCP avoids overflowing its receive

Receiving TCP avoids overflowing its receive buffer by maintaining LastByteRcvd  LastByteRead  MaxRcvBuffer Receiver throttles the sender by having AdvertisedWindow based on free space annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 18available for buffering. AdvertisedWindow  MaxRcvBuffer  ((NextByteExpected  1)  LastByteRead) Sending TCP adheres to AdvertisedWindow by computing EffectiveWindow that limits how much data it should send. EffectiveWindow  AdvertisedWindow

it should send. EffectiveWindow  AdvertisedWindow  (LastByteSent  LastByteAcked) When data arrives, LastByteRcvd moves to its right and AdvertisedWindow shrinks. Receiver acknowledges only, if preceding bytes have arrived. AdvertisedWindow expands when data is read by the application. o If data is read as fast as it arrives then AdvertisedWindow  MaxRcvBuffer o If data is read slowly, it eventually leads to a AdvertisedWindow of size 0. AdvertisedWindow field is designed to allow sender to keep

field is designed to allow sender to keep the pipe full. TCP TRANSMISSION TCP has three mechanism to trigger the transmission of a segment. They are o Maximum Segment Size (MSS)  Silly Window Syndrome o Timeout  Nagles Algorithm Silly Window Syndrome When either the sending application program creates data slowly or the receiving application program consumes data slowly, or both, problems arise. Any of these situations results in the sending of data in very small segments, which reduces the

of data in very small segments, which reduces the efficiency of the operation. This problem is called the silly window syndrome. The sending TCP may create a silly window syndrome if it is serving an application program that creates data slowly, for example, 1 byte at a time. The application program writes 1 byte at a time into the buffer of the sending TCP. The result is a lot of 1byte segments that are traveling through an internet. The solution is to prevent the sending TCP from sending the

is to prevent the sending TCP from sending the data byte by byte. The sending TCP must be forced to wait and collect data to send in a larger block. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 19 Nagles Algorithm If there is data to send but is less than MSS, then we may want to wait some amount of time before sending the available data If we wait too long, then it may delay the process. If we dont wait long enough, it may end up sending small segments resulting in Silly

end up sending small segments resulting in Silly Window Syndrome. The solution is to introduce a timer and to transmit when the timer expires Nagle introduced an algorithm for solving this problem TCP CONGESTION CONTROL Congestion occurs if load (number of packets sent) is greater than capacity of the network (number of packets a network can handle). When load is less than network capacity, throughput increases proportionally. When load exceeds capacity, queues become full and the routers

capacity, queues become full and the routers discard some packets and throughput declines sharply. When too many packets are contending for the same link oThe queue overflows oPackets get dropped oNetwork is congested Network should provide a congestion control mechanism to deal with such a situation. TCP maintains a variable called CongestionWindow for each connection. TCP Congestion Control mechanisms are: annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 201. Additive Increase

Computer Networks Unit 4 201. Additive Increase  Multiplicative Decrease (AIMD) 2. Slow Start 3. Fast Retransmit and Fast Recovery Additive Increase  Multiplicative Decrease (AIMD) TCP source initializes CongestionWindow based on congestion level in the network. Source increases CongestionWindow when level of congestion goes down and decreases the same when level of congestion goes up. TCP interprets timeouts as a sign of congestion and reduces the rate of transmission. On timeout, source

the rate of transmission. On timeout, source reduces its CongestionWindow by half, i.e., multiplicative decrease. For example, if CongestionWindow  16 packets, after timeout it is 8. Value of CongestionWindow is never less than maximum segment size (MSS). When ACK arrives CongestionWindow is incremented marginally, i.e., additive increase. Increment  MSS  (MSSCongestionWindow) CongestionWindow  Increment For example, when ACK arrives for 1 packet, 2 packets are sent. When ACK for both packets

2 packets are sent. When ACK for both packets arrive, 3 packets are sent and so on. CongestionWindow increases and decreases throughout lifetime of the connection. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 21 When CongestionWindow is plotted as a function of time, a sawtooth pattern results. Slow Start Slow start is used to increase CongestionWindow exponentially from a cold start. Source TCP initializes CongestionWindow to one packet. TCP doubles the number of packets sent

one packet. TCP doubles the number of packets sent every RTT on successful transmission. When ACK arrives for first packet TCP adds 1 packet to CongestionWindow and sends two packets. When two ACKs arrive, TCP increments CongestionWindow by 2 packets and sends four packets and so on. Instead of sending entire permissible packets at once (bursty traffic), packets are sent in a phased manner, i.e., slow start. Initially TCP has no idea about congestion, henceforth it increases CongestionWindow

henceforth it increases CongestionWindow rapidly until there is a timeout. On timeout: CongestionThreshold  CongestionWindow 2 CongestionWindow  1 Slow start is repeated until CongestionWindow reaches CongestionThreshold and thereafter 1 packet per RTT. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 22The congestion window trace will look like Fast Retransmit And Fast Recovery TCP timeouts led to long periods of time during which the connection went dead while waiting for a timer

the connection went dead while waiting for a timer to expire. Fast retransmit is a heuristic approach that triggers retransmission of a dropped packet sooner than the regular timeout mechanism. It does not replace regular timeouts. When a packet arrives out of order, receiving TCP resends the same acknowledgment (duplicate ACK) it sent last time. When three duplicate ACK arrives at the sender, it infers that corresponding packet may be lost due to congestion and retransmits that packet. This is

to congestion and retransmits that packet. This is called fast retransmit before regular timeout. When packet loss is detected using fast retransmit, the slow start phase is replaced by additive increase, multiplicative decrease method. This is known as fast recovery. Instead of setting CongestionWindow to one packet, this method uses the ACKs that are still in pipe to clock the sending of packets. Slow start is only used at the beginning of a connection and after regular timeout. At other

a connection and after regular timeout. At other times, it follows a pure AIMD pattern.  annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 23For example, packets 1 and 2 are received whereas packet 3 gets lost. o Receiver sends a duplicate ACK for packet 2 when packet 4 arrives. o Sender receives 3 duplicate ACKs after sending packet 6 retransmits packet 3. o When packet 3 is received, receiver sends cumulative ACK up to packet 6. The congestion window trace will look like TCP

6. The congestion window trace will look like TCP CONGESTION AVOIDANCE Congestion avoidance mechanisms prevent congestion before it actually occurs. These mechanisms predict when congestion is about to happen and then to reduce the rate at which hosts send data just before packets start being discarded. TCP creates loss of packets in order to determine bandwidth of the connection. Routers help the end nodes by intimating when congestion is likely to occur. Congestionavoidance mechanisms are: o

to occur. Congestionavoidance mechanisms are: o DEC bit  Destination Experiencing Congestion Bit o RED  Random Early Detection Dec Bit  Destination Experiencing Congestion Bit The first mechanism developed for use on the Digital Network Architecture (DNA). The idea is to evenly split the responsibility for congestion control between the routers and the end nodes. Each router monitors the load it is experiencing and explicitly notifies the end nodes when congestion is about to occur. This

end nodes when congestion is about to occur. This notification is implemented by setting a binary congestion bit in the packets that flow through the router; hence the name DECbit. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 24The destination host then copies this congestion bit into the ACK it sends back to the source. The Source checks how many ACK has DEC bit set for previous window packets. If less than 50 of ACK have DEC bit set, then source increases its congestion

DEC bit set, then source increases its congestion window by 1 packet Otherwise, decreases the congestion window by 87.5. Finally, the source adjusts its sending rate so as to avoid congestion. Increase by 1, decrease by 0.875 rule was based on AIMD for stabilization. A single congestion bit is added to the packet header. Using a queue length of 1 as the trigger for setting the congestion bit. A router sets this bit in a packet if its average queue length is greater than or equal to 1 at the time

length is greater than or equal to 1 at the time the packet arrives. Computing average queue length at a router using DEC bit Average queue length is measured over a time interval that includes the last busy  last idle cycle  current busy cycle. It calculates the average queue length by dividing the curve area with time interval. Red  Random Early Detection The second mechanism of congestion avoidance is called as Random Early Detection (RED). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer

annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 25Each router is programmed to monitor its own queue length, and when it detects that there is congestion, it notifies the source to adjust its congestion window. RED differs from the DEC bit scheme by two ways: a. In DECbit, explicit notification about congestion is sent to source, whereas RED implicitly notifies the source by dropping a few packets. b.DECbit may lead to tail drop policy, whereas RED drops packet based on drop

policy, whereas RED drops packet based on drop probability in a random manner. Drop each arriving packet with some drop probability whenever the queue length exceeds some drop level. This idea is called early random drop. Computation of average queue length using RED AvgLen  (1  Weight)  AvgLen  Weight  SampleLen where 0  Weight  1 and SampleLen  is the length of the queue when a sample measurement is made. The queue length is measured every time a new packet arrives at the gateway. RED has two

a new packet arrives at the gateway. RED has two queue length thresholds that trigger certain activity: MinThreshold and MaxThreshold When a packet arrives at a gateway it compares Avglen with these two values according to the following rules. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 266. STREAM CONTROL TRANSMISSION PROTOCOL (SCTP) Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) is a reliable, messageoriented transport layer protocol. SCTP has mixed features of TCP and UDP.

protocol. SCTP has mixed features of TCP and UDP. SCTP maintains the message boundaries and detects the lost data, duplicate data as well as outoforder data. SCTP provides the Congestion control as well as Flow control. SCTP is especially designed for internet applications as well as multimedia communication. SCTP SERVICES ProcesstoProcess Communication SCTP provides processtoprocess communication. Multiple Streams SCTP allows multistream service in each connection, which is called association

in each connection, which is called association in SCTP terminology. If one of the streams is blocked, the other streams can still deliver their data. Multihoming An SCTP association supports multihoming service. The sending and receiving host can define multiple IP addresses in each end for an association. In this faulttolerant approach, when one path fails, another interface can be used for data delivery without interruption. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4

Computer Networks Unit 4 27FullDuplex Communication SCTP offers fullduplex service, where data can flow in both directions at the same time. Each SCTP then has a sending and receiving buffer and packets are sent in both directions. ConnectionOriented Service SCTP is a connectionoriented protocol. In SCTP, a connection is called an association. If a client wants to send and receive message from server , the steps are : Step1: The two SCTPs establish the connection with each other. Step2: Once

the connection with each other. Step2: Once the connection is established, the data gets exchanged in both the directions. Step3: Finally, the association is terminated. Reliable Service SCTP is a reliable transport protocol. It uses an acknowledgment mechanism to check the safe and sound arrival of data. SCTP PACKET FORMAT An SCTP packet has a mandatory general header and a set of blocks called chunks. General Header The general header (packet header) defines the end points of each association

header) defines the end points of each association to which the packet belongs It guarantees that the packet belongs to a particular association It also preserves the integrity of the contents of the packet including the header itself. There are four fields in the general header. Source port This field identifies the sending port. Destination port This field identifies the receiving port that hosts use to route the packet to the appropriate endpointapplication.

the packet to the appropriate endpointapplication. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 28Verification tag A 32 bit random value created during initialization to distinguish stale packets from a previous connection. Checksum The next field is a checksum. The size of the checksum is 32 bits. SCTP uses CRC32 Checksum. Chunks Control information or user data are carried in chunks. Chunks have a common layout. The first three fields are common to all chunks; the information

fields are common to all chunks; the information field depends on the type of chunk. The type field can define up to 256 types of chunks. Only a few have been defined so far; the rest are reserved for future use. The flag field defines special flags that a particular chunk may need. The length field defines the total size of the chunk, in bytes, including the type, flag, and length fields. Types of Chunks An SCTP association may send many packets, a packet may contain several chunks, and chunks

a packet may contain several chunks, and chunks may belong to different streams. SCTP defines two types of chunks  Control chunks and Data chunks. A control chunk controls and maintains the association. A data chunk carries user data. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 29SCTP ASSOCIATION SCTP is a connectionoriented protocol. A connection in SCTP is called an association to emphasize multihoming. SCTP Associations consists of three phases: Association Establishment

of three phases: Association Establishment Data Transfer Association Termination Association Establishment Association establishment in SCTP requires a fourway handshake. In this procedure, a client process wants to establish an association with a server process using SCTP as the transportlayer protocol. The SCTP server needs to be prepared to receive any association (passive open). Association establishment, however, is initiated by the client (active open). The client sends the first packet,

(active open). The client sends the first packet, which contains an INIT chunk. The server sends the second packet, which contains an INIT ACK chunk. The INIT ACK also sends a cookie that defines the state of the server at this moment. The client sends the third packet, which includes a COOKIE ECHO chunk. This is a very simple chunk that echoes, without change, the cookie sent by the server. SCTP allows the inclusion of data chunks in this packet. The server sends the fourth packet, which

packet. The server sends the fourth packet, which includes the COOKIE ACK chunk that acknowledges the receipt of the COOKIE ECHO chunk. SCTP allows the inclusion of data chunks with this packet. Data Transfer The whole purpose of an association is to transfer data between two ends. After the association is established, bidirectional data transfer can take place. The client and the server can both send data. SCTP supports piggybacking. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit

Computer Networks Unit 4 30Types of SCTP data Transfer : 1. Multihoming Data Transfer Data transfer, by default, uses the primary address of the destination. If the primary is not available, one of the alternative addresses is used. This is called Multihoming Data Transfer. 2. Multistream Delivery SCTP can support multiple streams, which means that the sender process can define different streams and a message can belong to one of these streams. Each stream is assigned a stream identifier (SI)

Each stream is assigned a stream identifier (SI) which uniquely defines that stream. SCTP supports two types of data delivery in each stream: ordered (default) and unordered. Association Termination In SCTP,either of the two parties involved in exchanging data (client or server) can close the connection. SCTP does not allow a half closed association. If one end closes the association, the other end must stop sending new data. If any data are left over in the queue of the recipient of the

are left over in the queue of the recipient of the termination request, they are sent and the association is closed. Association termination uses three packets. SCTP FLOW CONTROL Flow control in SCTP is similar to that in TCP. Current SCTP implementations use a byteoriented window for flow control. Receiver Site The receiver has one buffer (queue) and three variables. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 31The queue holds the received data chunks that have not yet been

the received data chunks that have not yet been read by the process. The first variable holds the last TSN received, cumTSN. The second variable holds the available buffer size; winsize. The third variable holds the last accumulative acknowledgment, lastACK. The following figure shows the queue and variables at the receiver site. When the site receives a data chunk, it stores it at the end of the buffer (queue) and subtracts the size of the chunk from winSize. The TSN number of the chunk is

chunk from winSize. The TSN number of the chunk is stored in the cumTSN variable. When the process reads a chunk, it removes it from the queue and adds the size of the removed chunk to winSize (recycling). When the receiver decides to send a SACK, it checks the value of lastAck; if it is less than cumTSN, it sends a SACK with a cumulative TSN number equal to the cumTSN. It also includes the value of winSize as the advertised window size. Sender Site The sender has one buffer (queue) and three

Site The sender has one buffer (queue) and three variables: curTSN, rwnd, and inTransit. We assume each chunk is 100 bytes long. The buffer holds the chunks produced by the process that either have been sent or are ready to be sent. The first variable, curTSN, refers to the next chunk to be sent. All chunks in the queue with a TSN less than this value have been sent, but not acknowledged; they are outstanding. The second variable, rwnd, holds the last value advertised by the receiver (in bytes).

last value advertised by the receiver (in bytes). The third variable, inTransit, holds the number of bytes in transit, bytes sent but not yet acknowledged. The following figure shows the queue and variables at the sender site. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 32A chunk pointed to by curTSN can be sent if the size of the data is less than or equal to the quantity rwnd  inTransit. After sending the chunk, the value of curTSN is incremented by 1 and now points to the

curTSN is incremented by 1 and now points to the next chunk to be sent. The value of inTransit is incremented by the size of the data in the transmitted chunk. When a SACK is received, the chunks with a TSN less than or equal to the cumulative TSN in the SACK are removed from the queue and discarded. The sender does not have to worry about them anymore. The value of inTransit is reduced by the total size of the discarded chunks. The value of rwnd is updated with the value of the advertised

rwnd is updated with the value of the advertised window in the SACK. SCTP ERROR CONTROL SCTP is a reliable transport layer protocol. It uses a SACK chunk to report the state of the receiver buffer to the sender. Each implementation uses a different set of entities and timers for the receiver and sender sites. Receiver Site The receiver stores all chunks that have arrived in its queue including the outof order ones. However, it leaves spaces for any missing chunks. It discards duplicate messages,

missing chunks. It discards duplicate messages, but keeps track of them for reports to the sender. The following figure shows a typical design for the receiver site and the state of the receiving queue at a particular point in time. The available window size is 1000 bytes. The last acknowledgment sent was for data chunk 20. Chunks 21 to 23 have been received in order. The first outoforder block contains chunks 26 to 28. The second outoforder block contains chunks 31 to 34. A variable holds the

contains chunks 31 to 34. A variable holds the value of cumTSN. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit 4 33An array of variables keeps track of the beginning and the end of each block that is out of order. An array of variables holds the duplicate chunks received. There is no need for storing duplicate chunks in the queue and they will be discarded. Sender Site At the sender site, it needs two buffers (queues): a sending queue and a retransmission queue. Three variables

queue and a retransmission queue. Three variables were used  rwnd, inTransit, and curTSN as described in the previous section. The following figure shows a typical design. The sending queue holds chunks 23 to 40. The chunks 23 to 36 have already been sent, but not acknowledged; they are outstanding chunks. The curTSN points to the next chunk to be sent (37). We assume that each chunk is 100 bytes, which means that 1400 bytes of data (chunks 23 to 36) is in transit. The sender at this moment has

36) is in transit. The sender at this moment has a retransmission queue. When a packet is sent, a retransmission timer starts for that packet (all data chunks in that packet). Some implementations use one single timer for the entire association, but other implementations use one timer for each packet. SCTP CONGESTION CONTROL SCTP is a transportlayer protocol with packets subject to congestion in the network. The SCTP designers have used the same strategies for congestion control as those used in

strategies for congestion control as those used in TCP. NOTE : REFER TCP CONGESTION CONTROL annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 11. INTRODUCTION The application layer is the highest layer in the protocol suite. The application layer provides services to the user. Communication is provided using a logical connection, which means that the two application layers assume that there is an imaginary direct connection through which they can send and receive messages. The

which they can send and receive messages. The application layer is the only layer that provides services to the Internet user The application layer exchange messages with their peers on other machines Applications need their own protocols. These applications are part of network protocol. Types of Application Protocols: Standard and Nonstandard Protocols Standard ApplicationLayer Protocols oThere are several applicationlayer protocols that have been standardized and documented by the Internet

been standardized and documented by the Internet authority. oEach standard protocol is a pair of computer programs that interact with the user and the transport layer to provide a specific service to the user. oTwo very widelyused standardized application protocols: SMTP : Simple Mail Transfer Protocol is used to exchange electronic mail. HTTP : Hyper Text Transport Protocol is used to communicate between Web browsers and Web servers. Nonstandard ApplicationLayer Protocols oA programmer can

ApplicationLayer Protocols oA programmer can create a nonstandard applicationlayer program if they can write two programs that provide service to the user by interacting with the transport layer. APPLICATIONLAYER PARADIGMS Two paradigms have been developed for Application Layer 1. Traditional Paradigm : ClientServer 2. New Paradigm : PeertoPeer UNIT 5 : APPLICATION LAYER WWW and HTTP  FTP  Email Telnet SSH  DNS  SNMP annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 2ClientServer

Computer Networks Unit5 2ClientServer Paradigm oThe traditional paradigm is called the clientserver paradigm. oIt was the most popular Paradigm. oIn this paradigm, the service provider is an application program, called the server process; it runs continuously, waiting for another application program, called the client process, to make a connection through the Internet and ask for service. oThe server process must be running all the time; the client process is started when the client needs to

client process is started when the client needs to receive service. oThere are normally some server processes that can provide a specific type of service, but there are many clients that request service from any of these server processes. PeertoPeer(P2P) Paradigm oA new paradigm, called the peertopeer paradigm has emerged to respond to the needs of some new applications. oIn this paradigm, there is no need for a server process to be running all the time and waiting for the client processes to

the time and waiting for the client processes to connect. oThe responsibility is shared between peers. oA computer connected to the Internet can provide service at one time and receive service at another time. oA computer can even provide and receive services at the same time. Mixed Paradigm oAn application may choose to use a mixture of the two paradigms by combining the advantages of both. oFor example, a lightload clientserver communication can be used to find the address of the peer that can

be used to find the address of the peer that can offer a service. oWhen the address of the peer is found, the actual service can be received from the peer by using the peertopeer paradigm. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 32. WWW (WORLD WIDE WEB) WWW is a distributed clientserver service, in which a client (Browsers such as IE, Firefox, etc.) can access services at a server (Web server such as IIS, Apache). The service provided is distributed over many locations

provided is distributed over many locations called sites. WWW was constructed originally by a small group of people led by Tim Berners Lee at CERN, in 1989 and in 1991 this was released to the world. A new protocol for the Internet and a system of document access to use it was proposed and named as WWW. This system allows document search and retrieval from any part of the Internet. The documents were having Hypertext as the content The units of information on the web can be referred to as pages,

on the web can be referred to as pages, documents or resources. A document can contain text, images, sound and video, together called Hypermedia. Web is a vast collection of data, information, software and protocols , spread across the world in web servers, which are accessed by client machines by browsers through the Internet. COMPONENTS OF THE WEB Structural Components 1. Web ClientsBrowsers 2. Web Servers 3. Web Caches 4.Internet Semantic Components 1. Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 2.

1. Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 2. Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML) 3. eXtensible Markup Language (XML) 4.Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Clients use browser application to send URLs via HTTP to servers requesting a Web page. Web pages constructed using HTML XML and consist of text, graphics, sounds plus embedded files Servers (or caches) respond with requested Web page. Clients browser renders Web page returned by server Web Page is written using Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML)

is written using Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML) Displays text, graphics and sound in browser The entire system runs over standard networking protocols (TCPIP, DNS) annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 4WEB CLIENTS (BROWSERS) A browser is a software on the client on the web which initiates the communication with the server. Each browser usually consists of three parts: a controller, client protocols, and interpreters. The controller receives input from the keyboard or

The controller receives input from the keyboard or the mouse and uses the client programs to access the document. After the document has been accessed, the controller uses one of the interpreters to display the document on the screen. Examples are Internet Explorer, Mozilla FireFox, Netscape Navigator, Safari etc. WEB SERVERS All the communication between the web client and a web server use the standard protocol called as HTTP. Web server informs its operating system to accept incoming network

its operating system to accept incoming network connections using a specific port on the machine. The server also runs as a background process. A client (browser) opens a connection to the server, sends a request, receives information from server and closes the connection. Web server monitors a communications port on its host machine, accepts the http commands through it and performs specified operations. HTTP commands include a URL specifying the host machine. The URL received is translated

the host machine. The URL received is translated into either a filename or a program name, accordingly the requested file or the output of the program execution is sent back to the browser. PROXY SERVER A Proxy server is a computer that keeps copies of responses to recent requests. The web client sends a request to the proxy server. The proxy server checks its cache. If the response is not stored in the cache, the proxy server sends the request to the corresponding server.

sends the request to the corresponding server. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 5Incoming responses are sent to the proxy server and stored for future requests from other clients. The proxy server reduces the load on the original server, decreases traffic, and improves latency. However, to use the proxy server, the client must be configured to access the proxy instead of the target server. The proxy server acts as both server and client. When it receives a request

both server and client. When it receives a request from a client for which it has a response, it acts as a server and sends the response to the client. When it receives a request from a client for which it does not have a response, it first acts as a client and sends a request to the target server. When the response has been received, it acts again as a server and sends the response to the client. URL  UNIFORM RESOURCE LOCATOR Uniform Resource Locator (URL), uniquely identify resources on the

Locator (URL), uniquely identify resources on the Internet URL provides information about its location on the Web When a user enters URL, browser forms a request message and sends it to the server. Web server retrieves the requested URL and sends back a response message. Web browser renders the response in HTML or appropriate format. Format : http:www.domainnamefilename Example : http:www.cs.hello.orgindex.html  The URL defines four parts  Method, Host computer, Port, and Path. oMethod: The

Host computer, Port, and Path. oMethod: The method is the protocol used to retrieve the document from a server. For example, HTTP. oHost: The host is the computer where the information is stored, and the computer is given an alias name. Web pages are mainly stored in the computers and the computers are given an alias name that begins with the characters www. This field is not mandatory. oPort: The URL can also contain the port number of the server, but its an optional field. If the port number

but its an optional field. If the port number is included, then it must come between the host and path and it should be separated from the host by a colon. oPath: Path is the pathname of the file where the information is stored. The path itself contain slashes that separate the directories from the subdirectories and files. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 6URL Paths The path of the document for a http protocol is same as that for a document or file or a directory in

as that for a document or file or a directory in a client. In Unix the path components are separated by forward slashes () and in windows backward slashes (). But an URL need not include all the directories in the path. A path which includes all the directories is a complete path, else it is a partial path. URI  Uniform Resource Identifiers URI is a string that identifies resources such as document, image, service, etc. It is of the form scheme:schemespecific Scheme identifies a resource type,

Scheme identifies a resource type, such as mailto for mail address, file for file name, etc. and schemespecific is a resource identifier. Example is mailto: abc123gmail.com URI identifies a resource, whereas URL is used to locate a resource. WEB DOCUMENTS The documents in the WWW can be grouped into three broad categories: Static, Dynamic and Active. Static Documents Static documents are fixedcontent documents that are created and stored in a server. The client can get a copy of the document

server. The client can get a copy of the document only. In other words, the contents of the file are determined when the file is created, not when it is used. Of course, the contents in the server can be changed, but the user cannot change them. When a client accesses the document, a copy of the document is sent. The user can then use a browser to see the document. Static documents are prepared using one of several languages: 1. HyperText Markup Language (HTML) 2. Extensible Markup Language

Language (HTML) 2. Extensible Markup Language (XML) 3. Extensible Style Language (XSL) 4. Extensible Hypertext Markup Language (XHTML). Dynamic Documents A dynamic document is created by a web server whenever a browser requests the document. When a request arrives, the web server runs an application program or a script that creates the dynamic document. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 7The server returns the result of the program or script as a response to the

of the program or script as a response to the browser that requested the document. Because a fresh document is created for each request, the contents of a dynamic document may vary from one request to another. A very simple example of a dynamic document is the retrieval of the time and date from a server. Time and date are kinds of information that are dynamic in that they change from moment to moment. Dynamic documents can be retrieved using one of several scripting languages: 1. Common Gateway

of several scripting languages: 1. Common Gateway Interface (CGI) 2. Java Server Pages (JSP) 3. Active Server Pages (ASP) 4. ColdFusion Active Documents For many applications, we need a program or a script to be run at the client site. These are called active documents. For example, suppose we want to run a program that creates animated graphics on the screen or a program that interacts with the user. The program definitely needs to be run at the client site where the animation or interaction

the client site where the animation or interaction takes place. When a browser requests an active document, the server sends a copy of the document or a script. The document is then run at the client (browser) site. Active documents can be created using one of several languages: 1. Java Applet  A program written in Java on the server. It is compiled and ready to be run. The document is in bytecode format. 2. Java Script  Download and run the script at the client site.  3. HTTP (HYPERTEXT

the script at the client site.  3. HTTP (HYPERTEXT TRANSFER PROTOCOL) The HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is used to define how the client server programs can be written to retrieve web pages from the Web. It is a protocol used to access the data on the World Wide Web (WWW). The HTTP protocol can be used to transfer the data in the form of plain text, hypertext, audio, video, and so on. HTTP is a stateless requestresponse protocol that governs clientserver communication. An HTTP client sends

clientserver communication. An HTTP client sends a request; an HTTP server returns a response. The server uses the port number 80; the client uses a temporary port number. HTTP uses the services of TCP , a connectionoriented and reliable protocol. HTTP is a textoriented protocol. It contains embedded URL known as links. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 8When hypertext is clicked, browser opens a new connection, retrieves file from the server and displays the file.

file from the server and displays the file. Each HTTP message has the general form STARTLINE CRLF MESSAGEHEADER CRLF CRLF MESSAGEBODY CRLF where CRLF stands for carriagereturnlinefeed. Features of HTTP oConnectionless protocol: HTTP is a connectionless protocol. HTTP client initiates a request and waits for a response from the server. When the server receives the request, the server processes the request and sends back the response to the HTTP client after which the client disconnects the

HTTP client after which the client disconnects the connection. The connection between client and server exist only during the current request and response time only. oMedia independent: HTTP protocol is a media independent as data can be sent as long as both the client and server know how to handle the data content. It is required for both the client and server to specify the content type in MIMEtype header. oStateless: HTTP is a stateless protocol as both the client and server know each other

as both the client and server know each other only during the current request. Due to this nature of the protocol, both the client and server do not retain the information between various requests of the web pages. HTTP REQUEST AND RESPONSE MESSAGES The HTTP protocol defines the format of the request and response messages. Request Message: The request message is sent by the client that consists of a request line, headers, and sometimes a body. Response Message: The response message is sent by

Response Message: The response message is sent by the server to the client that consists of a status line, headers, and sometimes a body. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 9HTTP REQUEST MESSAGE The first line in a request message is called a request line. After the request line, we can have zero or more request header lines. The body is an optional one. It contains the comment to be sent or the file to be published on the website when the method is PUT or POST.

on the website when the method is PUT or POST. Request Line There are three fields in this request line  Method, URL and Version. The Method field defines the request types. The URL field defines the address and name of the corresponding web page. The Version field gives the version of the protocol; the most current version of HTTP is 1.1. Some of the Method types are Request Header Each request header line sends additional information from the client to the server. Each header line has a header

to the server. Each header line has a header name, a colon, a space, and a header value. The value field defines the values associated with each header name. Headers defined for request message include annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 10Body The body can be present in a request message. It is optional. Usually, it contains the comment to be sent or the file to be published on the website when the method is PUT or POST. Conditional Request A client can add a condition

Conditional Request A client can add a condition in its request. In this case, the server will send the requested web page if the condition is met or inform the client otherwise. One of the most common conditions imposed by the client is the time and date the web page is modified. The client can send the header line IfModifiedSince with the request to tell the server that it needs the page only if it is modified after a certain point in time. HTTP RESPONSE MESSAGE The first line in a request

HTTP RESPONSE MESSAGE The first line in a request message is called a status line. After the request line, we can have zero or more response header lines. The body is an optional one. The body is present unless the response is an error message Status Line The Status line contains three fields  HTTP version , Status code, Status phrase The first field defines the version of HTTP protocol, currently 1.1. The status code field defines the status of the request. It classifies the HTTP result. It

of the request. It classifies the HTTP result. It consists of three digits. 1xxInformational, 2xx Success, 3xxRedirection, 4xxClient error, 5xxServer error The Status phrase field gives brief description about status code in text form. Some of the Status codes are annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 11Response Header Each header provides additional information to the client. Each header line has a header name, a colon, a space, and a header value. Some of the response

a space, and a header value. Some of the response headers are: Body The body contains the document to be sent from the server to the client. The body is present unless the response is an error message. HTTP CONNECTIONS HTTP Clients and Servers exchange multiple messages over the same TCP connection. If some of the objects are located on the same server, we have two choices: to retrieve each object using a new TCP connection or to make a TCP connection and retrieve them all. The first method is

and retrieve them all. The first method is referred to as a nonpersistent connection, the second as a persistent connection. HTTP 1.0 uses nonpersistent connections and HTTP 1.1 uses persistent connections . NONPERSISTENT CONNECTIONS In a nonpersistent connection, one TCP connection is made for each requestresponse. Only one object can be sent over a single TCP connection The client opens a TCP connection and sends a request. The server sends the response and closes the connection. The client

the response and closes the connection. The client reads the data until it encounters an endoffile marker. It then closes the connection. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 12PERSISTENT CONNECTIONS  HTTP version 1.1 specifies a persistent connection by default.  Multiple objects can be sent over a single TCP connection.  In a persistent connection, the server leaves the connection open for more requests after sending a response.  The server can close the connection at

response.  The server can close the connection at the request of a client or if a timeout has been reached.  Time and resources are saved using persistent connections. Only one set of buffers and variables needs to be set for the connection at each site.  The round trip time for connection establishment and connection termination is saved. HTTP COOKIES An HTTP cookie (also called web cookie, Internet cookie, browser cookie, or simply cookie) is a small piece of data sent from a website and

is a small piece of data sent from a website and stored on the users computer by the users web browser while the user is browsing. HTTP is stateless , Cookies are used to add State. Cookies were designed to be a reliable mechanism for websites to remember stateful information (such as items added in the shopping cart in an online store) or to record the users browsing activity (including clicking particular buttons, logging in, or recording which pages were visited in the past). They can also be

pages were visited in the past). They can also be used to remember arbitrary pieces of information that the user previously entered into form fields such as names, addresses, passwords, and credit card numbers. Components of Cookie A cookie consists of the following components: 1. Name 2. Value 3. Zero or more attributes (namevalue pairs). Attributes store information such as the cookies expiration, domain, and flags annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 13Creating and

Computer Networks Unit5 13Creating and Storing Cookies The creation and storing of cookies depend on the implementation; however, the principle is the same. 1. When a server receives a request from a client, it stores information about the client in a file or a string. The information may include the domain name of the client, the contents of the cookie (information the server has gathered about the client such as name, registration number, and so on), a timestamp, and other information

and so on), a timestamp, and other information depending on the implementation. 2. The server includes the cookie in the response that it sends to the client. 3. When the client receives the response, the browser stores the cookie in the cookie directory, which is sorted by the server domain name. Using Cookies When a client sends a request to a server, the browser looks in the cookie directory to see if it can find a cookie sent by that server. If found, the cookie is included in the request.

If found, the cookie is included in the request. When the server receives the request, it knows that this is an old client, not a new one. The contents of the cookie are never read by the browser or disclosed to the user. It is a cookie made by the server and eaten by the server. Types of Cookies 1.Authentication cookies These are the most common method used by web servers to know whether the user is logged in or not, and which account they are logged in with. Without such a mechanism, the site

logged in with. Without such a mechanism, the site would not know whether to send a page containing sensitive information, or require the user to authenticate themselves by logging in. 2.Tracking cookies These are commonly used as ways to compile individuals browsing histories. 3.Session cookie A session cookie exists only in temporary memory while the user navigates the website. Web browsers normally delete session cookies when the user closes the browser. 4.Persistent cookie Instead of

closes the browser. 4.Persistent cookie Instead of expiring when the web browser is closed as session cookies do, a persistent cookie expires at a specific date or after a specific length of time. This means that, for the cookies entire lifespan , its information will be transmitted to the server every time the user visits the website that it belongs to, or every time the user views a resource belonging to that website from another website. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks

Computer Networks Unit5 14HTTP CACHING HTTP Caching enables the client to retrieve document faster and reduces load on the server. HTTP Caching is implemented at Proxy server, ISP router and Browser. Server sets expiration date (Expires header) for each page, beyond which it is not cached. HTTP Cache document is returned to client only if it is an updated copy by checking against IfModifiedSince header. If cache document is outofdate, then request is forwarded to the server and response is

request is forwarded to the server and response is cached along the way. A web page will not be cached if nocache directive is specified. HTTP SECURITY HTTP does not provide security. However HTTP can be run over the Secure Socket Layer (SSL). In this case, HTTP is referred to as HTTPS. HTTPS provides confidentiality, client and server authentication, and data integrity. 4. FTP (FILE TRANSFER PROTOCOL) FTP stands for File transfer protocol. FTP is a standard internet protocol provided by TCPIP

is a standard internet protocol provided by TCPIP used for transmitting the files from one host to another. It is mainly used for transferring the web page files from their creator to the computer that acts as a server for other computers on the internet. It is also used for downloading the files to computer from other servers. Although we can transfer files using HTTP, FTP is a better choice to transfer large files or to transfer files using different formats. FTP OBJECTIVES It provides the

different formats. FTP OBJECTIVES It provides the sharing of files. It is used to encourage the use of remote computers. It transfers the data more reliably and efficiently. FTP MECHANISM annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 15The above figure shows the basic model of the FTP. The FTP client has three components: ouser interface, control process, and data transfer process. The server has two components: oserver control process and server data transfer process. FTP

process and server data transfer process. FTP CONNECTIONS There are two types of connections in FTP  Control Connection and Data Connection. The two connections in FTP have different lifetimes. The control connection remains connected during the entire interactive FTP session. The data connection is opened and then closed for each file transfer activity. When a user starts an FTP session, the control connection opens. While the control connection is open, the data connection can be opened and

is open, the data connection can be opened and closed multiple times if several files are transferred. FTP uses two wellknown TCP ports: oPort 21 is used for the control connection oPort 20 is used for the data connection. Control Connection: oThe control connection uses very simple rules for communication. oThrough control connection, we can transfer a line of command or line of response at a time. oThe control connection is made between the control processes. oThe control connection remains

control processes. oThe control connection remains connected during the entire interactive FTP session. Data Connection: oThe Data Connection uses very complex rules as data types may vary. oThe data connection is made between data transfer processes. oThe data connection opens when a command comes for transferring the files and closes when the file is transferred. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 16FTP COMMUNICATION FTP Communication is achieved through commands and

FTP Communication is achieved through commands and responses. FTP Commands are sent from the client to the server FTP responses are sent from the server to the client. FTP Commands are in the form of ASCII uppercase, which may or may not be followed by an argument. Some of the most common commands are Every FTP command generates at least one response. A response has two parts: a threedigit number followed by text. The numeric part defines the code; the text part defines needed parameter. FTP

code; the text part defines needed parameter. FTP FILE TYPE FTP can transfer one of the following file types across the data connection: ASCII file, EBCDIC file, or image file. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 17FTP DATA STRUCTURE FTP can transfer a file across the data connection using one of the following data structure : file structure, record structure, or page structure. The file structure format is the default one and has no structure. It is a continuous stream

and has no structure. It is a continuous stream of bytes. In the record structure, the file is divided into records. This can be used only with text files. In the page structure, the file is divided into pages, with each page having a page number and a page header. The pages can be stored and accessed randomly or sequentially. FTP TRANSMISSION MODE FTP can transfer a file across the data connection using one of the following three transmission modes: stream mode, block mode, or compressed mode.

stream mode, block mode, or compressed mode. The stream mode is the default mode; data are delivered from FTP to TCP as a continuous stream of bytes. In the block mode, data can be delivered from FTP to TCP in blocks. In the compressed mode, data can be compressed and delivered from FTP to TCP. FTP FILE TRANSFER File transfer occurs over the data connection under the control of the commands sent over the control connection. File transfer in FTP means one of three things: oretrieving a file

FTP means one of three things: oretrieving a file (server to client) ostoring a file (client to server) odirectory listing (server to client). FTP SECURITY FTP requires a password, the password is sent in plaintext which is unencrypted. This means it can be intercepted and used by an attacker. The data transfer connection also transfers data in plaintext, which is insecure. To be secure, one can add a Secure Socket Layer between the FTP application layer and the TCP layer. In this case FTP is

layer and the TCP layer. In this case FTP is called SSLFTP. 5. EMAIL (SMTP, MIME, IMAP, POP) One of the most popular Internet services is electronic mail (Email). Email is one of the oldest network applications. The three main components of an Email are 1. User Agent (UA) 2. Messsage Transfer Agent (MTA)  SMTP 3. Messsage Access Agent (MAA)  IMAP , POP annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 18 When the sender and the receiver of an email are on the same system, we need

of an email are on the same system, we need only two User Agents and no Message Transfer Agent When the sender and the receiver of an email are on different system, we need two UA, two pairs of MTA (client and server), and two MAA (client and server). WORKING OF EMAIL When Alice needs to send a message to Bob, she runs a UA program to prepare the message and send it to her mail server. The mail server at her site uses a queue (spool) to store messages waiting to be sent. The message, however,

messages waiting to be sent. The message, however, needs to be sent through the Internet from Alices site to Bobs site using an MTA. Here two message transfer agents are needed: one client and one server. The server needs to run all the time because it does not know when a client will ask for a connection. The client can be triggered by the system when there is a message in the queue to be sent. The user agent at the Bob site allows Bob to read the received message. Bob later uses an MAA client

the received message. Bob later uses an MAA client to retrieve the message from an MAA server running on the second server. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 19USER AGENT (UA) The first component of an electronic mail system is the user agent (UA). It provides service to the user to make the process of sending and receiving a message easier. A user agent is a software package that composes, reads, replies to, and forwards messages. It also handles local mailboxes on

messages. It also handles local mailboxes on the user computers. There are two types of user agents: Commanddriven and GUIbased. Command driven oCommand driven user agents belong to the early days of electronic mail. oA commanddriven user agent normally accepts a one character command from the keyboard to perform its task. oSome examples of command driven user agents are mail, pine, and elm. GUIbased oModern user agents are GUIbased. oThey allow the user to interact with the software by using

the user to interact with the software by using both the keyboard and the mouse. oThey have graphical components such as icons, menu bars, and windows that make the services easy to access. oSome examples of GUIbased user agents are Eudora and Outlook. MESSAGE TRANSFER AGENT (MTA) The actual mail transfer is done through message transfer agents (MTA). To send mail, a system must have the client MTA, and to receive mail, a system must have a server MTA. The formal protocol that defines the MTA

MTA. The formal protocol that defines the MTA client and server in the Internet is called Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP). MESSAGE ACCESS AGENT (MAA) MAA is a software that pulls messages out of a mailbox. POP3 and IMAP4 are examples of MAA. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 20ADDRESS FORMAT OF EMAIL Email address is userid  domain where domain is hostname of the mail server. MESSAGE FORMAT OF EMAIL Email message consists of two parts namely header and body. Each

consists of two parts namely header and body. Each header line contains type and value separated by a colon (:). Some header contents are: o From: identifier sender of the message. o To: mail address of the recipient(s). o Subject: says about purpose of the message. o Date: timestamp of when the message was transmitted. Header is separated from the body by a blank line. Body contains the actual message. Email was extended in 1993 to carry many different types of data: audio, video, images, Word

types of data: audio, video, images, Word documents, and so on. This extended version is known as MIME(Multipurpose Mail Extension). SIMPLE MAIL TRANSFER PROTOCOL (SMTP) SMTP is the standard protocol for transferring mail between hosts in the TCPIP protocol suite. SMTP is not concerned with the format or content of messages themselves. SMTP uses information written on the envelope of the mail (message header), but does not look at the contents (message body) of the envelope.

at the contents (message body) of the envelope. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 21 SMTP clients and servers have two main components oUser Agents(UA)  Prepares the message, encloses it in an envelope. oMail Transfer Agent (MTA)  Transfers the mail across the internet SMTP also allows the use of Relays allowing other MTAs to relay the mail. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 22SMTP MAIL FLOW To begin, mail is created by a useragent program

To begin, mail is created by a useragent program in response to user input. Each created message consists of a header that includes the recipients email address and other information, and a message body containing the message to be sent. These messages are then queued in some fashion and provided as input to an SMTP Sender program. SMTP COMMANDS AND RESPONSES The operation of SMTP consists of a series of commands and responses exchanged between the SMTP sender and SMTP receiver. The initiative

the SMTP sender and SMTP receiver. The initiative is with the SMTP sender, who establishes the TCP connection. Once the connection is established, the SMTP sender sends commands over the connection to the receiver. The command is from an MTA client to an MTA server; the response is from an MTA server to the MTA client. SMTP Commands Commands are sent from the client to the server. It consists of a keyword followed by zero or more arguments. SMTP defines 14 commands.

zero or more arguments. SMTP defines 14 commands. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 23 SMTP Responses Responses are sent from the server to the client. A response is a three digit code that may be followed by additional textual information. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 24SMTP OPERATIONS Basic SMTP operation occurs in three phases: 1. Connection Setup 2. Mail Transfer 3. Connection Termination Connection Setup An SMTP sender will

Termination Connection Setup An SMTP sender will attempt to set up a TCP connection with a target host when it has one or more mail messages to deliver to that host. The sequence is quite simple: 1. The sender opens a TCP connection with the receiver. 2. Once the connection is established, the receiver identifies itself with Service Ready. 3. The sender identifies itself with the HELO command. 4. The receiver accepts the senders identification with OK. 5. If the mail service on the destination

with OK. 5. If the mail service on the destination is unavailable, the destination host returns a Service Not Available reply in step 2, and the process is terminated. Mail Transfer Once a connection has been established, the SMTP sender may send one or more messages to the SMTP receiver. There are three logical phases to the transfer of a message: 1. A MAIL command identifies the originator of the message. 2. One or more RCPT commands identify the recipients for this message. 3. A DATA command

the recipients for this message. 3. A DATA command transfers the message text. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 25Connection Termination The SMTP sender closes the connection in two steps. First, the sender sends a QUIT command and waits for a reply. The second step is to initiate a TCP close operation for the TCP connection. The receiver initiates its TCP close after sending its reply to the QUIT command. LIMITATIONS OF SMTP SMTP cannot transmit executable files or

OF SMTP SMTP cannot transmit executable files or other binary objects. SMTP cannot transmit text data that includes national language characters, as these are represented by 8bit codes with values of 128 decimal or higher, and SMTP is limited to 7bit ASCII. SMTP servers may reject mail message over a certain size. SMTP gateways that translate between ASCII and the character code EBCDIC do not use a consistent set of mappings, resulting in translation problems. Some SMTP implementations do not

problems. Some SMTP implementations do not adhere completely to the SMTP standards defined. Common problems include the following: 1. Deletion, addition, or recording of carriage return and linefeed. 2. Truncating or wrapping lines longer than 76 characters. 3. Removal of trailing white space (tab and space characters). 4. Padding of lines in a message to the same length. 5. Conversion of tab characters into multiplespace characters. MULTIPURPOSE INTERNET MAIL EXTENSION (MIME) SMTP provides a

INTERNET MAIL EXTENSION (MIME) SMTP provides a basic email service, while MIME adds multimedia capability to SMTP. MIME is an extension to SMTP and is used to overcome the problems and limitations of SMTP. Email system was designed to send messages only in ASCII format. Languages such as French, Chinese, etc., are not supported. Image, audio and video files cannot be sent. MIME adds the following features to email service: annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 26 Be able

Computer Networks Unit5 26 Be able to send multiple attachments with a single message;  Unlimited message length;  Use of character sets other than ASCII code;  Use of rich text (layouts, fonts, colors, etc)  Binary attachments (executables, images, audio or video files, etc.), which may be divided if needed. MIME is a protocol that converts nonASCII data to 7bit NVT(Network Virtual Terminal) ASCII and viceversa. MIME HEADERS Using headers, MIME describes the type of message content and the

MIME describes the type of message content and the encoding used. Headers defined in MIME are: MIMEVersion current version, i.e., 1.1 ContentType  message type (texthtml, imagejpeg, applicationpdf) ContentTransferEncoding  message encoding scheme (eg base64). ContentId  unique identifier for the message. ContentDescription  describes type of the message body. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 27MIME CONTENT TYPES There are seven different major types of content and a

are seven different major types of content and a total of 14 subtypes. In general, a content type declares the general type of data, and the subtype specifies a particular format for that type of data. MIME also defines a multipart type that says how a message carrying more than one data type is structured. This is like a programming language that defines both base types (e.g., integers and floats) and compound types (e.g., structures and arrays). One possible multipart subtype is mixed, which

One possible multipart subtype is mixed, which says that the message contains a set of independent data pieces in a specified order. Each piece then has its own header line that describes the type of that piece. The table below lists the MIME content types: ENCODING FORMATS OF MIME MIME uses various encoding formats to convert binary data into the ASCII character set. To transfer binary data, MIME offers five encoding formats which can be used in the header transferencoding: 7bit : 7bit text

in the header transferencoding: 7bit : 7bit text format (for messages without accented characters); 8bit : 8bit text format; quotedprintable : QuotedPrintable format, recommended for messages which use a 7bit alphabet (such as when there are accent marks); base64 : Base 64, for sending binary files as attachments; binary : binary format; not recommended. Since MIME is very open, it can use thirdparty encoding formats such as: BinHex : A proprietary format belonging to Apple Uuencode : for

format belonging to Apple Uuencode : for UNIXtoUNIX encoding Xencode : for binarytotext encoding annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 28MESSAGE TRANSFER IN MIME MTA is a mail daemon (sendmail) active on hosts having mailbox, used to send an email. Mail passes through a sequence of gateways before it reaches the recipient mail server. Each gateway stores and forwards the mail using Simple mail transfer protocol (SMTP). SMTP defines communication between MTAs over TCP on

defines communication between MTAs over TCP on port 25. In an SMTP session, sending MTA is client and receiver is server. In each exchange: Client posts a command (HELO, MAIL, RCPT, DATA, QUIT, VRFY, etc.) Server responds with a code (250, 550, 354, 221, 251 etc) and an explanation. Client is identified using HELO command and verified by the server Client forwards message to server, if server is willing to accept. Message is terminated by a line with only single period (.) in it. Eventually

line with only single period (.) in it. Eventually client terminates the connection. IMAP (INTERNET MAIL ACCESS PROTOCOL) IMAP is an Application Layer Internet protocol that allows an email client to access email on a remote mail server. It is a method of accessing electronic mail messages that are kept on a possibly shared mail server. IMAP is a more capable wire protocol. IMAP is similar to SMTP in many ways. IMAP is a clientserver protocol running over TCP on port 143. IMAP allows multiple

running over TCP on port 143. IMAP allows multiple clients simultaneously connected to the same mailbox, and through flags stored on the server, different clients accessing the same mailbox at the same or different times can detect state changes made by other clients. In other words, it permits a client email program to access remote message stores as if they were local. For example, email stored on an IMAP server can be manipulated from a desktop computer at home, a workstation at the office,

computer at home, a workstation at the office, and a notebook computer while travelling, without the need to transfer messages or files back and forth between these computers. IMAP can support email serving in three modes: annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 29Offline Online Users may connect to the server, look at what email is available, and access it online. This looks to the user very much like having local spool files, but theyre on the mail server. Disconnected

files, but theyre on the mail server. Disconnected operation A mail client connects to the server, can make a cache copy of selected messages, and disconnects from the server. The user can then work on the messages offline, and connect to the server later and resynchronize the server status with the cache. OPERATION OF IMAP The mail transfer begins with the client authenticating the user and identifying the mailbox they want to access. Client Commands LOGIN, AUTHENTICATE, SELECT, EXAMINE, CLOSE,

LOGIN, AUTHENTICATE, SELECT, EXAMINE, CLOSE, and LOGOUT Server Responses OK, NO (no permission), BAD (incorrect command), When user wishes to FETCH a message, server responds in MIME format. Message attributes such as size are also exchanged. Flags are used by client to report user actions. SEEN, ANSWERED, DELETED, RECENT IMAP4 The latest version is IMAP4. IMAP4 is more powerful and more complex. IMAP4 provides the following extra functions: A user can check the email header prior to

A user can check the email header prior to downloading. A user can search the contents of the email for a specific string of characters prior to downloading. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 30A user can partially download email. This is especially useful if bandwidth is limited and the email contains multimedia with high bandwidth requirements. A user can create, delete, or rename mailboxes on the mail server. A user can create a hierarchy of mailboxes in a folder

can create a hierarchy of mailboxes in a folder for email storage. ADVANTAGES OF IMAP With IMAP, the primary storage is on the server, not on the local machine. Email being put away for storage can be foldered on local disk, or can be foldered on the IMAP server. The protocol allows full user of remote folders, including a remote folder hierarchy and multiple inboxes. It keeps track of explicit status of messages, and allows for userdefined status. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer

annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 31Supports new mail notification explicitly. Extensible for nonemail data, like netnews, document storage, etc. Selective fetching of individual MIME body parts. Serverbased search to minimize data transfer. Servers may have extensions that can be negotiated. POST OFFICE PROTOCOL (POP3) Post Office Protocol (POP3) is an applicationlayer Internet standard protocol used by local email clients to retrieve email from a remote server over

to retrieve email from a remote server over a TCPIP connection. There are two versions of POP.  The first, called POP2, became a standard in the mid80s and requires SMTP to send messages.  The current version, POP3, can be used with or without SMTP. POP3 uses TCPIP port 110. POP is a much simpler protocol, making implementation easier. POP supports offline access to the messages, thus requires less internet usage time POP does not allow search facility. In order to access the messages, it is

facility. In order to access the messages, it is necessary to download them. It allows only one mailbox to be created on server. It is not suitable for accessing non mail data. POP mail moves the message from the email server onto the local computer, although there is usually an option to leave the messages on the email server as well. POP treats the mailbox as one store, and has no concept of folders. POP works in two modes namely, delete and keep mode. In delete mode, mail is deleted from the

mode. In delete mode, mail is deleted from the mailbox after retrieval. The delete mode is normally used when the user is working at their permanent computer and can save and organize the received mail after reading or replying. In keep mode, mail after reading is kept in mailbox for later retrieval. The keep mode is normally used when the user accesses her mail away from their primary computer . annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 32POP3 client is installed on the

Networks Unit5 32POP3 client is installed on the recipient computer and POP server on the mail server. Client opens a connection to the server using TCP on port 110. Client sends username and password to access mailbox and to retrieve messages. POP3 Commands POP commands are generally abbreviated into codes of three or four letters The following describes some of the POP commands: 1.UID  This command opens the connection 2.STAT  It is used to display number of messages currently in the mailbox

number of messages currently in the mailbox 3.LIST  It is used to get the summary of messages 4.RETR This command helps to select a mailbox to access the messages 5.DELE  It is used to delete a message 6.RSET  It is used to reset the session to its initial state 7.QUIT  It is used to log off the session DIFFERENCE BETWEEN POP AND IMAP SNo. POP IMAP 1 Generally used to support single client.Designed to handle multiple clients. 2 Messages are accessed offline.Messages are accessed online although

offline.Messages are accessed online although it also supports offline mode. 3 POP does not allow search facility. IMAP offers ability to search emails. 4 All the messages have to be downloaded.It allows selective transfer of messages to the client. 5 Only one mailbox can be created on the server.Multiple mailboxes can be created on the server. 6 Not suitable for accessing nonmail data.Suitable for accessing nonmail data i.e. attachment. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks

Computer Networks Unit5 337POP commands are generally abbreviated into codes of three or four letters. Eg. STAT.IMAP commands are not abbreviated, they are full. Eg. STATUS. 8It requires minimum use of server resources.Clients are totally dependent on server. 9Mails once downloaded cannot be accessed from some other location.Allows mails to be accessed from multiple locations. 10 The emails are not downloaded automatically.Users can view the headings and sender of emails and then decide to

headings and sender of emails and then decide to download. 11 POP requires less internet usage time. IMAP requires more internet usage time. Advantages of IMAP over POP IMAP is more powerful and more complex than POP. User can check the email header prior to downloading. User can search email for a specific string of characters prior to downloading. User can download partially, very useful in case of limited bandwidth. User can create, delete, or rename mailboxes on the mail server. 6. TELNET

or rename mailboxes on the mail server. 6. TELNET (TERMINAL NETWORK) TELNET is the original remote logging protocol, based on clientserver program. Telnet provides a connection to the remote computer in such a way that a local terminal appears to be at the remote side. TELNET allows us to explain the issues and challenges related to the concept of remote logging. Network administrators often use TELNET for diagnostic and debugging purposes. TELNET requires a logging name and password. It is

TELNET requires a logging name and password. It is vulnerable to hacking because it sends all data including the password in plaintext (not encrypted). A hacker can eavesdrop and obtain the logging name and password.Because of this security issue, the use of TELNET has diminished. TYPES OF TELNET LOGGING There are two types of TELNET logging: Local Logging and Remote Logging annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 34Local Login When a user logs into a local system, it is

Login When a user logs into a local system, it is called local logging. As a user types at a terminal or at a workstation running a terminal emulator, the keystrokes are accepted by the terminal driver. The terminal driver passes the characters to the operating system. The operating system, in turn, interprets the combination of characters and invokes the desired application program or utility. Remote Logging When a user wants to access an application program or utility located on a remote

application program or utility located on a remote machine, they perform remote logging. Remote Logging uses TELNET client and TELENT server programs. The user sends the keystrokes to the terminal driver where the local operating system accepts the characters but does not interpret them. The characters are sent to the TELNET client, which transforms the characters into a universal character set called Network Virtual Terminal (NVT) characters and delivers them to the local TCPIP stack. The

and delivers them to the local TCPIP stack. The commands or text, in NVT form, travel through the Internet and arrive at the TCPIP stack at the remote machine. The characters are delivered to the operating system and passed to the TELNET server, which changes the characters to the corresponding characters understandable by the remote computer. The characters cannot be passed directly to the operating system because the remote operating system is not designed to receive characters from a TELNET

not designed to receive characters from a TELNET server; it is designed to receive characters from a terminal driver. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 35A piece of software called pseudoterminal driver, is added to this,which pretends that the characters are coming from a terminal. The operating system then passes the characters to the appropriate application program. TELENT OPTIONS TELNET lets the client and server negotiate options before or during the use of the

negotiate options before or during the use of the service. Options are extra features available to a user with a more sophisticated terminal. Users with simpler terminals can use default features. TELENT COMMANDS NETWORK VIRTUAL TERMINAL (NVT) The mechanism to access a remote computer is complex. We are dealing with heterogeneous systems. This is because every computer and its operating system accepts a special combination of characters as tokens. For example, the endoffile token in a computer

For example, the endoffile token in a computer running the DOS operating system is Ctrlz, while the UNIX operating system recognizes Ctrld. If we want to access any remote computer in the world, we must first know what type of computer we will be connected to, and we must also install the specific terminal emulator used by that computer. TELNET solves this problem by defining a universal interface called the Network Virtual Terminal (NVT) character set. Via this interface, the client TELNET

set. Via this interface, the client TELNET translates characters (data or commands) that come from the local terminal into NVT form and delivers them to the network. The server TELNET, on the other hand, translates data and commands from NVT form into the form acceptable by the remote computer. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 36NVT Character Format NVT uses two sets of characters, one for data and one for control. For data, NVT normally uses what is called NVT

For data, NVT normally uses what is called NVT ASCII. This is an 8bit character set in which the seven lowest order bits are the same as ASCII and the highest order bit is 0. To send control characters between computers , NVT uses an 8bit character set in which the highest order bit is set to 1. 7. SSH (SECURE SHELL) Secure Shell (SSH) is a secure application program that can be used today for several purposes such as remote logging and file transfer, it was originally designed to replace

transfer, it was originally designed to replace TELNET. There are two versions of SSH: SSH1 and SSH2, which are totally incompatible. The first version, SSH1, is now deprecated because of security flaws in it. SSH COMPONENTS SSH is an applicationlayer protocol with three components: 1. SSH TransportLayer Protocol (SSHTRANS) 2. SSH Authentication Protocol (SSHAUTH) 3. SSH Connection Protocol (SSHCONN) SSH TransportLayer Protocol (SSHTRANS) SSH first uses a protocol that creates a secured channel

uses a protocol that creates a secured channel on top of the TCP. This new layer is an independent protocol referred to as SSHTRANS. When the procedure implementing this protocol is called, the client and server first use the TCP protocol to establish an insecure connection. Then they exchange several security parameters to establish a secure channel on top of the TCP. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 37Services provided by this protocol: 1. Privacy or

provided by this protocol: 1. Privacy or confidentiality of the message exchanged 2. Data integrity, which means that it is guaranteed that the messages exchanged between the client and server are not changed by an intruder 3. Server authentication, which means that the client is now sure that the server is the one that it claims to be 4. Compression of the messages, which improves the efficiency of the system and makes attack more difficult SSH Authentication Protocol (SSHAUTH) After a secure

Authentication Protocol (SSHAUTH) After a secure channel is established between the client and the server and the server is authenticated for the client. SSH can call another procedure that can authenticate the client for the server. This layer defines a number of authentication tools similar to the ones used in SSL. Authentication starts with the client, which sends a request message to the server. The request includes the user name, server name, the method of authentication, and the required

the method of authentication, and the required data. The server responds with either a success message, which confirms that the client is authenticated, or a failed message, which means that the process needs to be repeated with a new request message. SSH Connection Protocol (SSHCONN) After the secured channel is established and both server and client are authenticated for each other, SSH can call a piece of software that implements the third protocol, SSHCONN. One of the services provided by

protocol, SSHCONN. One of the services provided by the SSHCONN protocol is multiplexing. SSHCONN takes the secure channel established by the two previous protocols and lets the client create multiple logical channels over it. Each channel can be used for a different purpose, such as remote logging, file transfer, and so on. SSH APPLICATIONS SSH is a generalpurpose protocol that provides a secure connection between a client and server. SSH for Remote Logging Several free and commercial

SSH for Remote Logging Several free and commercial applications use SSH for remote logging. Among them, we can mention PuTTy, by Simon Tatham, which is a client SSH program that can be used for remote logging. Another application program is Tectia, which can be used on several platforms. SSH for File Transfer One of the application programs that is built on top of SSH for file transfer is the Secure File Transfer Program (sftp). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 38The

Computer Networks Unit5 38The sftp application program uses one of the channels provided by the SSH to transfer files. Another common application is called Secure Copy (scp). This application uses the same format as the UNIX copy command, cp, to copy files. Port Forwarding One of the interesting services provided by the SSH protocol is port forwarding. We can use the secured channels available in SSH to access an application program that does not provide security services. Applications such as

provide security services. Applications such as TELNET and Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP),can use the services of the SSH port forwarding mechanism. The SSH port forwarding mechanism creates a tunnel through which the messages belonging to other protocols can travel. For this reason, this mechanism is sometimes referred to as SSH tunneling. SSH PACKET FORMAT The length field defines the length of the packet but does not include the padding. The Padding field is added to the packet to make

The Padding field is added to the packet to make the attack on the security provision more difficult. The type field designates the type of the packet used in different SSH protocols. The data field is the data transferred by the packet in different protocols. The CRC field is used for error detection. SECURING FTP APPLICATIONS USING SSH The FTP client can use the SSH client on the local site to make a secure connection with the SSH server on the remote site. Any request from the FTP client to

remote site. Any request from the FTP client to the FTP server is carried through the tunnel provided by the SSH client and server. Any response from the FTP server to the FTP client is also carried through the tunnel provided by the SSH client and server. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 398. DNS (DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM) Domain Name System was designed in 1984. DNS is used for nametoaddress mapping. The DNS provides the protocol which allows clients and servers to

the protocol which allows clients and servers to communicate with each other. Eg: Host name like www.yahoo.com is translated into numerical IP addresses like 207.174.77.131 Domain Name System (DNS) is a distributed database used by TCPIP applications to map between hostnames and IP addresses and to provide electronic mail routing information. Each site maintains its own database of information and runs a server program that other systems across the Internet can query. WORKING OF DNS The

across the Internet can query. WORKING OF DNS The following six steps shows the working of a DNS. It maps the host name to an IP address: 1.The user passes the host name to the file transfer client. 2.The file transfer client passes the host name to the DNS client. 3.Each computer, after being booted, knows the address of one DNS server. The DNS client sends a message to a DNS server with a query that gives the file transfer server name using the known IP address of the DNS server. 4.The DNS

the known IP address of the DNS server. 4.The DNS server responds with the IP address of the desired file transfer server. 5.The DNS server passes the IP address to the file transfer client. 6.The file transfer client now uses the received IP address to access the file transfer server. NAME SPACE To be unambiguous, the names assigned to machines must be carefully selected from a name space with complete control over the binding between the names and IP address.

over the binding between the names and IP address. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 40The names must be unique because the addresses are unique. A name space that maps each address to a unique name can be organized in two ways: flat (or) hierarchical. Flat Name Space In a flat name space, a name is assigned to an address. A name in this space is a sequence of characters without structure. The main disadvantage of a flat name space is that it cannot be used in a large

name space is that it cannot be used in a large system such as Internet because it must be centrally controlled to avoid ambiguity and duplication. Hierarchical Name Space In a hierarchical name space, each name is made of several parts. The first part can define the organization, the second part can define the name, the third part can define departments, and so on. In this case, the authority to assign and control the name spaces can be decentralized. A central authority can assign the part of

A central authority can assign the part of the name that defines the nature of the organization and the name. The responsibility for the rest of the name can be given to the organization itself. Suffixes can be added to the name to define host or resources. The management of the organization need not worry that the prefix chosen for a host is taken by another organization because even if part of an address is the same, the whole address is different. The names are unique without the need to be

The names are unique without the need to be assigned by a central authority. The central authority controls only part of the name, not the whole name. DOMAIN NAME SPACE To have a hierarchical name space, a domain name space was designed. In this design, the names are defined in an invertedtree structure with the root at the top. Each node in the tree has a label, which is a string with a maximum of 63 characters. The root label is a null string. DNS requires that children of a node have

string. DNS requires that children of a node have different labels, which guarantees the uniqueness of the domain names. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 41 Each node in the tree has a label, which is a string with a maximum of 63 characters. The root label is a null string (empty string). DNS requires that children of a node (nodes that branch from the same node) have different labels, which guarantees the uniqueness of the domain names. Domain Name Each node in the

of the domain names. Domain Name Each node in the tree has a label called as domain name. A full domain name is a sequence of labels separated by dots (.) The domain names are always read from the node up to the root. The last label is the label of the root (null). This means that a full domain name always ends in a null label, which means the last character is a dot because the null string is nothing. If a label is terminated by a null string, it is called a fully qualified domain name (FQDN).

it is called a fully qualified domain name (FQDN). If a label is not terminated by a null string, it is called a partially qualified domain name (PQDN). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 42Domain A domain is a subtree of the domain name space. The name of the domain is the domain name of the node at the top of the sub tree. A domain may itself be divided into domains. DISTRIBUTION OF NAME SPACE The information contained in the domain name space must be stored. But it

in the domain name space must be stored. But it is very inefficient and also not reliable to have just one computer store such a huge amount of information. It is inefficient because responding to requests from all over the world, places a heavy load on the system. It is not reliable because any failure makes the data inaccessible. The solution to these problems is to distribute the information among many computers called DNS servers. HIERARCHY OF NAME SERVERS The way to distribute information

OF NAME SERVERS The way to distribute information among DNS servers is to divide the whole space into many domains based on the first level. Let the root standalone and create as many domains as there are first level nodes. Because a domain created this way could be very large, DNS allows domains to be divided further into smaller domains. Thus we have a hierarchy of servers in the same way that we have a hierarchy of names. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 43ZONE

Computer Networks Unit5 43ZONE What a server is responsible for, or has authority over, is called a zone. The server makes a database called a zone file and keeps all the information for every node under that domain. If a server accepts responsibility for a domain and does not divide the domains into smaller domains, the domain and zone refer to the same thing. But if a server divides its domain into sub domains and delegates parts of its authority to other servers, domain and zone refer to

to other servers, domain and zone refer to different things. The information about the nodes in the sub domains is stored in the servers at the lower levels, with the original server keeping some sort of references to these lower level servers. But still, the original server does not free itself from responsibility totally. It still has a zone, but the detailed information is kept by the lower level servers. ROOT SERVER A root sever is a server whose zone consists of the whole tree. A root

whose zone consists of the whole tree. A root server usually does not store any information about domains but delegates its authority to other servers, keeping references to those servers. Currently there are more than 13 root servers, each covering the whole domain name space. The servers are distributed all around the world. PRIMARY AND SECONDARY SERVERS DNS defines two types of servers: primary and secondary. A Primary Server is a server that stores a file about the zone for which it is an

stores a file about the zone for which it is an authority. Primary Servers are responsible for creating, maintaining, and updating the zone file. Primary Server stores the zone file on a local disc. A secondary server is a server that transfers the complete information about a zone from another server (Primary or Secondary) and stores the file on its local disc. If updating is required, it must be done by the primary server, which sends the updated version to the secondary.

which sends the updated version to the secondary. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 44A primary server loads all information from the disk file; the secondary server loads all information from the primary server. DNS IN THE INTERNET DNS is a protocol that can be used in different platforms. In the Internet, the domain name space (tree) is divided into three different sections  Generic domains, Country domains, and Inverse domain. Generic Domains The generic domains

domain. Generic Domains The generic domains define registered hosts according to their generic behavior. Each node in the tree defines a domain, which is an index to the domain name space database. The first level in the generic domains section allows seven possible three character levels. These levels describe the organization types as listed in following table. Country Domains The country domains section follows the same format as the generic domains but uses two characters for country

domains but uses two characters for country abbreviations E.g.; in for India, us for United States etc) in place of the three character organizational abbreviation at the first level. Second level labels can be organizational, or they can be more specific, national designation. India for example, uses state abbreviations as a subdivision of the country domain us. (e.g., ca.in.) Inverse Domains Mapping an address to a name is called Inverse domain. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer

annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 45The client can send an IP address to a server to be mapped to a domain name and it is called PTR(Pointer) query. To answer queries of this kind, DNS uses the inverse domain DNS RESOLUTION Mapping a name to an address or an address to a name is called name address resolution. DNS is designed as a client server application. A host that needs to map an address to a name or a name to an address calls a DNS client named a Resolver. The

address calls a DNS client named a Resolver. The Resolver accesses the closest DNS server with a mapping request. If the server has the information, it satisfies the resolver; otherwise, it either refers the resolver to other servers or asks other servers to provide the information. After the resolver receives the mapping, it interprets the response to see if it is a real resolution or an error and finally delivers the result to the process that requested it. A resolution can be either recursive

requested it. A resolution can be either recursive or iterative. Recursive Resolution The application program on the source host calls the DNS resolver (client) to find the IP address of the destination host. The resolver, which does not know this address, sends the query to the local DNS server of the source (Event 1) The local server sends the query to a root DNS server (Event 2) The Root server sends the query to the toplevelDNS server(Event 3) The toplevel DNS server knows only the IP

3) The toplevel DNS server knows only the IP address of the local DNS server at the destination. So it forwards the query to the local server, which knows the IP address of the destination host (Event 4) The IP address of the destination host is now sent back to the toplevel DNS server(Event 5) then back to the root server (Event 6), then back to the source DNS server, which may cache it for the future queries (Event 7), and finally back to the source host (Event 8).

7), and finally back to the source host (Event 8). annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 46Iterative Resolution In iterative resolution, each server that does not know the mapping, sends the IP address of the next server back to the one that requested it. The iterative resolution takes place between two local servers. The original resolver gets the final answer from the destination local server. The messages shown by Events 2, 4, and 6 contain the same query. However, the

2, 4, and 6 contain the same query. However, the message shown by Event 3 contains the IP address of the top level domain server. The message shown by Event 5 contains the IP address of the destination local DNS server The message shown by Event 7 contains the IP address of the destination. When the Source local DNS server receives the IP address of the destination, it sends it to the resolver (Event 8). DNS CACHING Each time a server receives a query for a name that is not in its domain, it

a query for a name that is not in its domain, it needs to search its database for a server IP address. DNS handles this with a mechanism called caching. When a server asks for a mapping from another server and receives the response, it stores this information in its cache memory before sending it to the client. If the same or another client asks for the same mapping, it can check its cache memory and resolve the problem. However, to inform the client that the response is coming from the cache

client that the response is coming from the cache memory and not from an authoritative source, the server marks the response as unauthoritative. Caching speeds up resolution. Reduction of this search time would increase efficiency, but it can also be problematic. If a server caches a mapping for a long time, it may send an outdated mapping to the client. To counter this, two techniques are used. First, the authoritative server always adds information to the mapping called time to live (TTL). It

to the mapping called time to live (TTL). It defines the time in seconds that the receiving server can cache the information. After that time, the mapping is invalid and any query must be sent again to the authoritative server. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 47Second, DNS requires that each server keep a TTL counter for each mapping it caches. The cache memory must be searched periodically and those mappings with an expired TTL must be purged. DNS RESOURCE RECORDS

expired TTL must be purged. DNS RESOURCE RECORDS (RR) The zone information associated with a server is implemented as a set of resource records. In other words, a name server stores a database of resource records. A resource record is a 5tuple structure : (Domain Name, Type, Class, TTL, Value) The domain name identifies the resource record. The type defines how the value should be interpreted. The value defines the information kept about the domain name. The TTL defines the number of seconds for

name. The TTL defines the number of seconds for which the information is valid. The class defines the type of network Types of Resource Records DNS MESSAGES DNS has two types of messages: query and response. Both types have the same format. The query message consists of a header and question section. The response message consists of a header, question section, answer section, authoritative section, and additional section . Header Both query and response messages have the same header format with

response messages have the same header format with some fields set to zero for the query messages. The header fields are as follows: annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 48 The identification field is used by the client to match the response with the query. The flag field defines whether the message is a query or response. It also includes status of error. The next four fields in the header define the number of each record type in the message. Question Section The

record type in the message. Question Section The question section consists of one or more question records. It is present in both query and response messages. Answer Section The answer section consists of one or more resource records. It is present only in response messages. Authoritative Section The authoritative section gives information (domain name) about one or more authoritative servers for the query. Additional Information Section The additional information section provides additional

additional information section provides additional information that may help the resolver. DNS CONNECTIONS DNS can use either UDP or TCP. In both cases the wellknown port used by the server is port 53. UDP is used when the size of the response message is less than 512 bytes because most UDP packages have a 512byte packet size limit. If the size of the response message is more than 512 bytes, a TCP connection is used. DNS REGISTRARS New domains are added to DNS through a registrar. A fee is

are added to DNS through a registrar. A fee is charged. A registrar first verifies that the requested domain name is unique and then enters it into the DNS database. Today, there are many registrars; their names and addresses can be found at http:www.intenic.net To register, the organization needs to give the name of its server and the IP address of the server. For example, a new commercial organization named wonderful with a server named ws and IP address 200.200.200.5, needs to give the

ws and IP address 200.200.200.5, needs to give the following information to one of the registrars: Domain name: ws.wonderful.com IP address: 200.200.200.5 annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 49DDNS (DYNAMIC DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM) In DNS, when there is a change, such as adding a new host, removing a host, or changing an IP address, the change must be made to the DNS master file. The DNS master file must be updated dynamically. The Dynamic Domain Name System (DDNS) is used

The Dynamic Domain Name System (DDNS) is used for this purpose. In DDNS, when a binding between a name and an address is determined, the information is sent to a primary DNS server. The primary server updates the zone. The secondary servers are notified either actively or passively. In active notification, the primary server sends a message to the secondary servers about the change in the zone, whereas in passive notification, the secondary servers periodically check for any changes. In either

periodically check for any changes. In either case, after being notified about the change, the secondary server requests information about the entire zone (called the zone transfer). To provide security and prevent unauthorized changes in the DNS records, DDNS can use an authentication mechanism. DNS SECURITY DNS is one of the most important systems in the Internet infrastructure; it provides crucial services to Internet users. Applications such as Web access or email are heavily dependent on

as Web access or email are heavily dependent on the proper operation of DNS. DNS can be attacked in several ways including: Attack on Confidentiality  The attacker may read the response of a DNS server to find the nature or names of sites the user mostly accesses. This type of information can be used to find the users profile. To prevent this attack, DNS messages need to be confidential. Attack on authentication and integrity  The attacker may intercept the response of a DNS server and change it

the response of a DNS server and change it or create a totally new bogus response to direct the user to the site or domain the attacker wishes the user to access. This type of attack can be prevented using message origin authentication and message integrity. Attack on denialofservice  The attacker may flood the DNS server to overwhelm it or eventually crash it. This type of attack can be prevented using the provision against denialofservice attack. To protect DNS, IETF has devised a technology

To protect DNS, IETF has devised a technology named DNS Security (DNSSEC) that provides message origin authentication and message integrity using a security service called digital signature. DNSSEC, however, does not provide confidentiality for the DNS messages. There is no specific protection against the denialofservice attack in the specification of DNSSEC. However, the caching system protects the upper level servers against this attack to some extent. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591

some extent. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 509. SNMP (SIMPLE NETWORK MANAGEMENT PROTOCOL) The Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) is a framework for managing devices in an internet using the TCPIP protocol suite. SNMP is an application layer protocol that monitors and manages routers, distributed over a network. It provides a set of operations for monitoring and managing the internet. SNMP uses services of UDP on two wellknown ports: 161 (Agent) and 162

of UDP on two wellknown ports: 161 (Agent) and 162 (manager). SNMP uses the concept of manager and agent. SNMP MANAGER A manager is a host that runs the SNMP client program The manager has access to the values in the database kept by the agent. A manager checks the agent by requesting the information that reflects the behavior of the agent. A manager also forces the agent to perform a certain function by resetting values in the agent database. For example, a router can store in appropriate

For example, a router can store in appropriate variables the number of packets received and forwarded. The manager can fetch and compare the values of these two variables to see if the router is congested or not. SNMP AGENT The agent is a router that runs the SNMP server program. The agent is used to keep the information in a database while the manager is used to access the values in the database. For example, a router can store the appropriate variables such as a number of packets received and

variables such as a number of packets received and forwarded while the manager can compare these variables to determine whether the router is congested or not. Agents can also contribute to the management process. A server program on the agent checks the environment, if something goes wrong, the agent sends a warning message to the manager. SNMP MANAGEMENT COMPONENTS Management of the internet is achieved through simple interaction between a manager and agent. Management is achieved through the

and agent. Management is achieved through the use of two protocols: annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 51oStructure of Management Information (SMI) oManagement Information Base (MIB). Structure of Management Information (SMI) To use SNMP, we need rules for naming objects. SMI is a protocol that defines these rules. SMI is a guideline for SNMP It emphasizes three attributes to handle an object: name, data type, and encoding method. Its functions are: To name objects. To

method. Its functions are: To name objects. To define the type of data that can be stored in an object. To show how to encode data for transmission over the network. Name SMI requires that each managed object (such as a router, a variable in a router, a value,etc.) have a unique name. To name objects globally. SMI uses an object identifier, which is a hierarchical identifier based on a tree structure. The tree structure starts with an unnamed root. Each object can be defined using a sequence of

Each object can be defined using a sequence of integers separated by dots. The tree structure can also define an object using a sequence of textual names separated by dots. Type of data The second attribute of an object is the type of data stored in it. To define the data type, SMI uses Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) definitions. SMI has two broad categories of data types: simple and structured. The simple data types are atomic data types. Some of them are taken directly from ASN.1; some

Some of them are taken directly from ASN.1; some are added by SMI. SMI defines two structured data types: sequence and sequence of. Sequence  A sequence data type is a combination of simple data types, not necessarily of the same type. Sequence of  A sequence of data type is a combination of simple data types all of the same type or a combination of sequence data types all of the same type. Encoding data SMI uses another standard, Basic Encoding Rules (BER), to encode data to be transmitted over

Rules (BER), to encode data to be transmitted over the network. BER specifies that each piece of data be encoded in triplet format (TLV): tag, length, value annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 52Management Information Base (MIB) The Management Information Base (MIB) is the second component used in network management. Each agent has its own MIB, which is a collection of objects to be managed. MIB classifies objects under groups. MIB Variables MIB variables are of two

groups. MIB Variables MIB variables are of two types namely simple and table. Simple variables are accessed using groupid followed by variableid and 0 Tables are ordered as columnrow rules, i.e., column by column from top to bottom. Only leaf elements are accessible in a table type. SNMP MESSAGESPDU SNMP is requestreply protocol that supports various operations using PDUs. SNMP defines eight types of protocol data units (or PDUs): GetRequest, GetNextRequest, GetBulkRequest, SetRequest, Response,

GetBulkRequest, SetRequest, Response, Trap, InformRequest, and Report GetRequest The GetRequest PDU is sent from the manager (client) to the agent (server) to retrieve the value of a variable or a set of variables. GetNextRequest The GetNextRequest PDU is sent from the manager to the agent to retrieve the value of a variable. annauniversityedu.blogspot.comCS8591  Computer Networks Unit5 53GetBulkRequest The GetBulkRequest PDU is sent from the manager to the agent to retrieve a large amount of

manager to the agent to retrieve a large amount of data. It can be used instead of multiple GetRequest and GetNextRequest PDUs. SetRequest The SetRequest PDU is sent from the manager to the agent to set (store) a value in a variable. Response The Response PDU is sent from an agent to a manager in response to GetRequest or GetNextRequest. It contains the value(s) of the variable(s) requested by the manager. Trap The Trap PDU is sent from the agent to the manager to report an event. For example,

to the manager to report an event. For example, if the agent is rebooted, it informs the manager and reports the time of rebooting. InformRequest The InformRequest PDU is sent from one manager to another remote manager to get the value of some variables from agents under the control of the remote manager. The remote manager responds with a Response PDU. Report The Report PDU is designed to report some types of errors between managers. annauniversityedu.blogspot.com

